Chapter I





Mr. Jones, of the Manor Farm, had locked the hen-houses for the night, butwas too drunk to remember to shut the pop-holes. With the ring of lightfrom his lantern dancing from side to side, he lurched across the yard,kicked off his boots at the back door, drew himself a last glass of beerfrom the barrel in the scullery, and made his way up to bed, whereMrs. Jones was already snoring.

As soon as the light in the bedroom went out there was a stirring and afluttering all through the farm buildings. Word had gone round during theday that old Major, the prize Middle White boar, had had a strange dreamon the previous night and wished to communicate it to the other animals.It had been agreed that they should all meet in the big barn as soon asMr. Jones was safely out of the way. Old Major (so he was always called,though the name under which he had been exhibited was Willingdon Beauty)was so highly regarded on the farm that everyone was quite ready to losean hour's sleep in order to hear what he had to say.

At one end of the big barn, on a sort of raised platform, Major wasalready ensconced on his bed of straw, under a lantern which hung from abeam. He was twelve years old and had lately grown rather stout, but hewas still a majestic-looking pig, with a wise and benevolent appearance inspite of the fact that his tushes had never been cut. Before long theother animals began to arrive and make themselves comfortable after theirdifferent fashions. First came the three dogs, Bluebell, Jessie, andPincher, and then the pigs, who settled down in the straw immediately infront of the platform. The hens perched themselves on the window-sills,the pigeons fluttered up to the rafters, the sheep and cows lay downbehind the pigs and began to chew the cud. The two cart-horses, Boxer andClover, came in together, walking very slowly and setting down their vasthairy hoofs with great care lest there should be some small animalconcealed in the straw. Clover was a stout motherly mare approachingmiddle life, who had never quite got her figure back after her fourth foal.Boxer was an enormous beast, nearly eighteen hands high, and as strong asany two ordinary horses put together. A white stripe down his nose gavehim a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rateintelligence, but he was universally respected for his steadiness ofcharacter and tremendous powers of work. After the horses came Muriel,the white goat, and Benjamin, the donkey. Benjamin was the oldest animalon the farm, and the worst tempered. He seldom talked, and when he did, itwas usually to make some cynical remark--for instance, he would say thatGod had given him a tail to keep the flies off, but that he would soonerhave had no tail and no flies. Alone among the animals on the farm henever laughed. If asked why, he would say that he saw nothing to laugh at.Nevertheless, without openly admitting it, he was devoted to Boxer; thetwo of them usually spent their Sundays together in the small paddockbeyond the orchard, grazing side by side and never speaking.

The two horses had just lain down when a brood of ducklings, which hadlost their mother, filed into the barn, cheeping feebly and wandering fromside to side to find some place where they would not be trodden on. Clovermade a sort of wall round them with her great foreleg, and the ducklingsnestled down inside it and promptly fell asleep. At the last momentMollie, the foolish, pretty white mare who drew Mr. Jones's trap, camemincing daintily in, chewing at a lump of sugar. She took a place near thefront and began flirting her white mane, hoping to draw attention to thered ribbons it was plaited with. Last of all came the cat, who lookedround, as usual, for the warmest place, and finally squeezed herself inbetween Boxer and Clover; there she purred contentedly throughout Major'sspeech without listening to a word of what he was saying.

All the animals were now present except Moses, the tame raven, who slepton a perch behind the back door. When Major saw that they had all madethemselves comfortable and were waiting attentively, he cleared his throatand began:

"Comrades, you have heard already about the strange dream that I had lastnight. But I will come to the dream later. I have something else to sayfirst. I do not think, comrades, that I shall be with you for many monthslonger, and before I die, I feel it my duty to pass on to you such wisdomas I have acquired. I have had a long life, I have had much time forthought as I lay alone in my stall, and I think I may say that Iunderstand the nature of life on this earth as well as any animal nowliving. It is about this that I wish to speak to you.

"Now, comrades, what is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it:our lives are miserable, laborious, and short. We are born, we are givenjust so much food as will keep the breath in our bodies, and those of uswho are capable of it are forced to work to the last atom of our strength;and the very instant that our usefulness has come to an end we areslaughtered with hideous cruelty. No animal in England knows the meaningof happiness or leisure after he is a year old. No animal in England isfree. The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is the plain truth.

"But is this simply part of the order of nature? Is it because this landof ours is so poor that it cannot afford a decent life to those who dwellupon it? No, comrades, a thousand times no! The soil of England isfertile, its climate is good, it is capable of affording food in abundanceto an enormously greater number of animals than now inhabit it. Thissingle farm of ours would support a dozen horses, twenty cows, hundreds ofsheep--and all of them living in a comfort and a dignity that are nowalmost beyond our imagining. Why then do we continue in this miserablecondition? Because nearly the whole of the produce of our labour is stolenfrom us by human beings. There, comrades, is the answer to all ourproblems. It is summed up in a single word--Man. Man is the only realenemy we have. Remove Man from the scene, and the root cause of hunger andoverwork is abolished for ever.

"Man is the only creature that consumes without producing. He does notgive milk, he does not lay eggs, he is too weak to pull the plough, hecannot run fast enough to catch rabbits. Yet he is lord of all theanimals. He sets them to work, he gives back to them the bare minimum thatwill prevent them from starving, and the rest he keeps for himself. Ourlabour tills the soil, our dung fertilises it, and yet there is not one ofus that owns more than his bare skin. You cows that I see before me, howmany thousands of gallons of milk have you given during this last year?And what has happened to that milk which should have been breeding upsturdy calves? Every drop of it has gone down the throats of our enemies.And you hens, how many eggs have you laid in this last year, and how manyof those eggs ever hatched into chickens? The rest have all gone to marketto bring in money for Jones and his men. And you, Clover, where are thosefour foals you bore, who should have been the support and pleasure of yourold age? Each was sold at a year old--you will never see one of themagain. In return for your four confinements and all your labour in thefields, what have you ever had except your bare rations and a stall?

"And even the miserable lives we lead are not allowed to reach theirnatural span. For myself I do not grumble, for I am one of the lucky ones.I am twelve years old and have had over four hundred children. Such is thenatural life of a pig. But no animal escapes the cruel knife in the end.You young porkers who are sitting in front of me, every one of you willscream your lives out at the block within a year. To that horror we allmust come--cows, pigs, hens, sheep, everyone. Even the horses and the dogshave no better fate. You, Boxer, the very day that those great muscles ofyours lose their power, Jones will sell you to the knacker, who will cutyour throat and boil you down for the foxhounds. As for the dogs, whenthey grow old and toothless, Jones ties a brick round their necks anddrowns them in the nearest pond.

"Is it not crystal clear, then, comrades, that all the evils of this lifeof ours spring from the tyranny of human beings? Only get rid of Man, andthe produce of our labour would be our own. Almost overnight we couldbecome rich and free. What then must we do? Why, work night and day, bodyand soul, for the overthrow of the human race! That is my message to you,comrades: Rebellion! I do not know when that Rebellion will come, it mightbe in a week or in a hundred years, but I know, as surely as I see thisstraw beneath my feet, that sooner or later justice will be done. Fix youreyes on that, comrades, throughout the short remainder of your lives! Andabove all, pass on this message of mine to those who come after you, sothat future generations shall carry on the struggle until it is victorious.

"And remember, comrades, your resolution must never falter. No argumentmust lead you astray. Never listen when they tell you that Man and theanimals have a common interest, that the prosperity of the one is theprosperity of the others. It is all lies. Man serves the interests of nocreature except himself. And among us animals let there be perfect unity,perfect comradeship in the struggle. All men are enemies. All animals arecomrades."

At this moment there was a tremendous uproar. While Major was speakingfour large rats had crept out of their holes and were sitting on theirhindquarters, listening to him. The dogs had suddenly caught sight ofthem, and it was only by a swift dash for their holes that the rats savedtheir lives. Major raised his trotter for silence.

"Comrades," he said, "here is a point that must be settled. The wildcreatures, such as rats and rabbits--are they our friends or our enemies?Let us put it to the vote. I propose this question to the meeting: Arerats comrades?"

The vote was taken at once, and it was agreed by an overwhelming majoritythat rats were comrades. There were only four dissentients, the three dogsand the cat, who was afterwards discovered to have voted on both sides.Major continued:

"I have little more to say. I merely repeat, remember always your duty ofenmity towards Man and all his ways. Whatever goes upon two legs is anenemy. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend. Andremember also that in fighting against Man, we must not come to resemblehim. Even when you have conquered him, do not adopt his vices. No animalmust ever live in a house, or sleep in a bed, or wear clothes, or drinkalcohol, or smoke tobacco, or touch money, or engage in trade. All thehabits of Man are evil. And, above all, no animal must ever tyrannise overhis own kind. Weak or strong, clever or simple, we are all brothers. Noanimal must ever kill any other animal. All animals are equal.

"And now, comrades, I will tell you about my dream of last night. I cannotdescribe that dream to you. It was a dream of the earth as it will be whenMan has vanished. But it reminded me of something that I had longforgotten. Many years ago, when I was a little pig, my mother and theother sows used to sing an old song of which they knew only the tune andthe first three words. I had known that tune in my infancy, but it hadlong since passed out of my mind. Last night, however, it came back to mein my dream. And what is more, the words of the song also came back-words,I am certain, which were sung by the animals of long ago and have beenlost to memory for generations. I will sing you that song now, comrades.I am old and my voice is hoarse, but when I have taught you the tune, youcan sing it better for yourselves. It is called 'Beasts of England'."

Old Major cleared his throat and began to sing. As he had said, his voicewas hoarse, but he sang well enough, and it was a stirring tune, somethingbetween 'Clementine' and 'La Cucaracha'. The words ran:

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,Beasts of every land and clime,Hearken to my joyful tidingsOf the golden future time.

Soon or late the day is coming,Tyrant Man shall be o'erthrown,And the fruitful fields of EnglandShall be trod by beasts alone.

Rings shall vanish from our noses,And the harness from our back,Bit and spur shall rust forever,Cruel whips no more shall crack.

Riches more than mind can picture,Wheat and barley, oats and hay,Clover, beans, and mangel-wurzelsShall be ours upon that day.

Bright will shine the fields of England,Purer shall its waters be,Sweeter yet shall blow its breezesOn the day that sets us free.

For that day we all must labour,Though we die before it break;Cows and horses, geese and turkeys,All must toil for freedom's sake.

Beasts of England, beasts of Ireland,Beasts of every land and clime,Hearken well and spread my tidingsOf the golden future time.



The singing of this song threw the animals into the wildest excitement.Almost before Major had reached the end, they had begun singing it forthemselves. Even the stupidest of them had already picked up the tune anda few of the words, and as for the clever ones, such as the pigs and dogs,they had the entire song by heart within a few minutes. And then, after afew preliminary tries, the whole farm burst out into 'Beasts of England' intremendous unison. The cows lowed it, the dogs whined it, the sheepbleated it, the horses whinnied it, the ducks quacked it. They were sodelighted with the song that they sang it right through five times insuccession, and might have continued singing it all night if they had notbeen interrupted.

Unfortunately, the uproar awoke Mr. Jones, who sprang out of bed, makingsure that there was a fox in the yard. He seized the gun which alwaysstood in a corner of his bedroom, and let fly a charge of number 6 shotinto the darkness. The pellets buried themselves in the wall of the barnand the meeting broke up hurriedly. Everyone fled to his ownsleeping-place. The birds jumped on to their perches, the animals settleddown in the straw, and the whole farm was asleep in a moment.







Chapter II





Three nights later old Major died peacefully in his sleep. His body wasburied at the foot of the orchard.

This was early in March. During the next three months there was muchsecret activity. Major's speech had given to the more intelligent animalson the farm a completely new outlook on life. They did not know when theRebellion predicted by Major would take place, they had no reason forthinking that it would be within their own lifetime, but they saw clearlythat it was their duty to prepare for it. The work of teaching andorganising the others fell naturally upon the pigs, who were generallyrecognised as being the cleverest of the animals. Pre-eminent among thepigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon, whom Mr. Jones wasbreeding up for sale. Napoleon was a large, rather fierce-lookingBerkshire boar, the only Berkshire on the farm, not much of a talker, butwith a reputation for getting his own way. Snowball was a more vivaciouspig than Napoleon, quicker in speech and more inventive, but was notconsidered to have the same depth of character. All the other male pigs onthe farm were porkers. The best known among them was a small fat pig namedSquealer, with very round cheeks, twinkling eyes, nimble movements, and ashrill voice. He was a brilliant talker, and when he was arguing somedifficult point he had a way of skipping from side to side and whiskinghis tail which was somehow very persuasive. The others said of Squealerthat he could turn black into white.

These three had elaborated old Major's teachings into a complete system ofthought, to which they gave the name of Animalism. Several nights a week,after Mr. Jones was asleep, they held secret meetings in the barn andexpounded the principles of Animalism to the others. At the beginning theymet with much stupidity and apathy. Some of the animals talked of the dutyof loyalty to Mr. Jones, whom they referred to as "Master," or madeelementary remarks such as "Mr. Jones feeds us. If he were gone, we shouldstarve to death." Others asked such questions as "Why should we care whathappens after we are dead?" or "If this Rebellion is to happen anyway,what difference does it make whether we work for it or not?", and the pigshad great difficulty in making them see that this was contrary to thespirit of Animalism. The stupidest questions of all were asked by Mollie,the white mare. The very first question she asked Snowball was: "Willthere still be sugar after the Rebellion?"

"No," said Snowball firmly. "We have no means of making sugar on thisfarm. Besides, you do not need sugar. You will have all the oats and hayyou want."

"And shall I still be allowed to wear ribbons in my mane?" asked Mollie.

"Comrade," said Snowball, "those ribbons that you are so devoted to arethe badge of slavery. Can you not understand that liberty is worth morethan ribbons?"

Mollie agreed, but she did not sound very convinced.

The pigs had an even harder struggle to counteract the lies put about byMoses, the tame raven. Moses, who was Mr. Jones's especial pet, was a spyand a tale-bearer, but he was also a clever talker. He claimed to know ofthe existence of a mysterious country called Sugarcandy Mountain, to whichall animals went when they died. It was situated somewhere up in the sky,a little distance beyond the clouds, Moses said. In Sugarcandy Mountain itwas Sunday seven days a week, clover was in season all the year round, andlump sugar and linseed cake grew on the hedges. The animals hated Mosesbecause he told tales and did no work, but some of them believed inSugarcandy Mountain, and the pigs had to argue very hard to persuade themthat there was no such place.

Their most faithful disciples were the two cart-horses, Boxer and Clover.These two had great difficulty in thinking anything out for themselves,but having once accepted the pigs as their teachers, they absorbedeverything that they were told, and passed it on to the other animals bysimple arguments. They were unfailing in their attendance at the secretmeetings in the barn, and led the singing of 'Beasts of England', withwhich the meetings always ended.

Now, as it turned out, the Rebellion was achieved much earlier and moreeasily than anyone had expected. In past years Mr. Jones, although a hardmaster, had been a capable farmer, but of late he had fallen on evil days.He had become much disheartened after losing money in a lawsuit, and hadtaken to drinking more than was good for him. For whole days at a time hewould lounge in his Windsor chair in the kitchen, reading the newspapers,drinking, and occasionally feeding Moses on crusts of bread soaked inbeer. His men were idle and dishonest, the fields were full of weeds, thebuildings wanted roofing, the hedges were neglected, and the animals wereunderfed.

June came and the hay was almost ready for cutting. On Midsummer's Eve,which was a Saturday, Mr. Jones went into Willingdon and got so drunk atthe Red Lion that he did not come back till midday on Sunday. The men hadmilked the cows in the early morning and then had gone out rabbiting,without bothering to feed the animals. When Mr. Jones got back heimmediately went to sleep on the drawing-room sofa with the News of theWorld over his face, so that when evening came, the animals were stillunfed. At last they could stand it no longer. One of the cows broke in thedoor of the store-shed with her horn and all the animals began to helpthemselves from the bins. It was just then that Mr. Jones woke up. Thenext moment he and his four men were in the store-shed with whips in theirhands, lashing out in all directions. This was more than the hungryanimals could bear. With one accord, though nothing of the kind had beenplanned beforehand, they flung themselves upon their tormentors. Jones andhis men suddenly found themselves being butted and kicked from all sides.The situation was quite out of their control. They had never seen animalsbehave like this before, and this sudden uprising of creatures whom theywere used to thrashing and maltreating just as they chose, frightened themalmost out of their wits. After only a moment or two they gave up tryingto defend themselves and took to their heels. A minute later all five ofthem were in full flight down the cart-track that led to the main road,with the animals pursuing them in triumph.

Mrs. Jones looked out of the bedroom window, saw what was happening,hurriedly flung a few possessions into a carpet bag, and slipped out ofthe farm by another way. Moses sprang off his perch and flapped after her,croaking loudly. Meanwhile the animals had chased Jones and his men out onto the road and slammed the five-barred gate behind them. And so, almostbefore they knew what was happening, the Rebellion had been successfullycarried through: Jones was expelled, and the Manor Farm was theirs.

For the first few minutes the animals could hardly believe in their goodfortune. Their first act was to gallop in a body right round theboundaries of the farm, as though to make quite sure that no human beingwas hiding anywhere upon it; then they raced back to the farm buildings towipe out the last traces of Jones's hated reign. The harness-room at theend of the stables was broken open; the bits, the nose-rings, thedog-chains, the cruel knives with which Mr. Jones had been used tocastrate the pigs and lambs, were all flung down the well. The reins, thehalters, the blinkers, the degrading nosebags, were thrown on to therubbish fire which was burning in the yard. So were the whips. All theanimals capered with joy when they saw the whips going up in flames.Snowball also threw on to the fire the ribbons with which the horses'manes and tails had usually been decorated on market days.

"Ribbons," he said, "should be considered as clothes, which are the markof a human being. All animals should go naked."

When Boxer heard this he fetched the small straw hat which he wore insummer to keep the flies out of his ears, and flung it on to the fire withthe rest.

In a very little while the animals had destroyed everything that remindedthem of Mr. Jones. Napoleon then led them back to the store-shed andserved out a double ration of corn to everybody, with two biscuits foreach dog. Then they sang 'Beasts of England' from end to end seven timesrunning, and after that they settled down for the night and slept as theyhad never slept before.

But they woke at dawn as usual, and suddenly remembering the gloriousthing that had happened, they all raced out into the pasture together. Alittle way down the pasture there was a knoll that commanded a view ofmost of the farm. The animals rushed to the top of it and gazed round themin the clear morning light. Yes, it was theirs--everything that they couldsee was theirs! In the ecstasy of that thought they gambolled round andround, they hurled themselves into the air in great leaps of excitement.They rolled in the dew, they cropped mouthfuls of the sweet summer grass,they kicked up clods of the black earth and snuffed its rich scent. Thenthey made a tour of inspection of the whole farm and surveyed withspeechless admiration the ploughland, the hayfield, the orchard, the pool,the spinney. It was as though they had never seen these things before, andeven now they could hardly believe that it was all their own.

Then they filed back to the farm buildings and halted in silence outsidethe door of the farmhouse. That was theirs too, but they were frightenedto go inside. After a moment, however, Snowball and Napoleon butted thedoor open with their shoulders and the animals entered in single file,walking with the utmost care for fear of disturbing anything. They tiptoedfrom room to room, afraid to speak above a whisper and gazing with a kindof awe at the unbelievable luxury, at the beds with their feathermattresses, the looking-glasses, the horsehair sofa, the Brussels carpet,the lithograph of Queen Victoria over the drawing-room mantelpiece. Theywere just coming down the stairs when Mollie was discovered to be missing.Going back, the others found that she had remained behind in the bestbedroom. She had taken a piece of blue ribbon from Mrs. Jones'sdressing-table, and was holding it against her shoulder and admiringherself in the glass in a very foolish manner. The others reproached hersharply, and they went outside. Some hams hanging in the kitchen weretaken out for burial, and the barrel of beer in the scullery was stove inwith a kick from Boxer's hoof, otherwise nothing in the house was touched.A unanimous resolution was passed on the spot that the farmhouse should bepreserved as a museum. All were agreed that no animal must ever live there.

The animals had their breakfast, and then Snowball and Napoleon calledthem together again.

"Comrades," said Snowball, "it is half-past six and we have a long daybefore us. Today we begin the hay harvest. But there is another matterthat must be attended to first."

The pigs now revealed that during the past three months they had taughtthemselves to read and write from an old spelling book which had belongedto Mr. Jones's children and which had been thrown on the rubbish heap.Napoleon sent for pots of black and white paint and led the way down tothe five-barred gate that gave on to the main road. Then Snowball (for itwas Snowball who was best at writing) took a brush between the twoknuckles of his trotter, painted out MANOR FARM from the top bar of thegate and in its place painted ANIMAL FARM. This was to be the name of thefarm from now onwards. After this they went back to the farm buildings,where Snowball and Napoleon sent for a ladder which they caused to be setagainst the end wall of the big barn. They explained that by their studiesof the past three months the pigs had succeeded in reducing the principlesof Animalism to Seven Commandments. These Seven Commandments would now beinscribed on the wall; they would form an unalterable law by which all theanimals on Animal Farm must live for ever after. With some difficulty(for it is not easy for a pig to balance himself on a ladder) Snowballclimbed up and set to work, with Squealer a few rungs below him holdingthe paint-pot. The Commandments were written on the tarred wall in greatwhite letters that could be read thirty yards away. They ran thus:



THE SEVEN COMMANDMENTS

1. Whatever goes upon two legs is an enemy.2. Whatever goes upon four legs, or has wings, is a friend.3. No animal shall wear clothes.4. No animal shall sleep in a bed.5. No animal shall drink alcohol.6. No animal shall kill any other animal.7. All animals are equal.



It was very neatly written, and except that "friend" was written "freind"and one of the "S's" was the wrong way round, the spelling was correct allthe way through. Snowball read it aloud for the benefit of the others. Allthe animals nodded in complete agreement, and the cleverer ones at oncebegan to learn the Commandments by heart.

"Now, comrades," cried Snowball, throwing down the paint-brush, "to thehayfield! Let us make it a point of honour to get in the harvest morequickly than Jones and his men could do."

But at this moment the three cows, who had seemed uneasy for some timepast, set up a loud lowing. They had not been milked for twenty-fourhours, and their udders were almost bursting. After a little thought, thepigs sent for buckets and milked the cows fairly successfully, theirtrotters being well adapted to this task. Soon there were five buckets offrothing creamy milk at which many of the animals looked with considerableinterest.

"What is going to happen to all that milk?" said someone.

"Jones used sometimes to mix some of it in our mash," said one of the hens.

"Never mind the milk, comrades!" cried Napoleon, placing himself in frontof the buckets. "That will be attended to. The harvest is more important.Comrade Snowball will lead the way. I shall follow in a few minutes.Forward, comrades! The hay is waiting."

So the animals trooped down to the hayfield to begin the harvest, and whenthey came back in the evening it was noticed that the milk had disappeared.







Chapter III





How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts wererewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success than they had hoped.

Sometimes the work was hard; the implements had been designed for humanbeings and not for animals, and it was a great drawback that no animal wasable to use any tool that involved standing on his hind legs. But the pigswere so clever that they could think of a way round every difficulty. Asfor the horses, they knew every inch of the field, and in fact understoodthe business of mowing and raking far better than Jones and his men hadever done. The pigs did not actually work, but directed and supervised theothers. With their superior knowledge it was natural that they shouldassume the leadership. Boxer and Clover would harness themselves to thecutter or the horse-rake (no bits or reins were needed in these days, ofcourse) and tramp steadily round and round the field with a pig walkingbehind and calling out "Gee up, comrade!" or "Whoa back, comrade!" as thecase might be. And every animal down to the humblest worked at turning thehay and gathering it. Even the ducks and hens toiled to and fro all day inthe sun, carrying tiny wisps of hay in their beaks. In the end theyfinished the harvest in two days' less time than it had usually takenJones and his men. Moreover, it was the biggest harvest that the farm hadever seen. There was no wastage whatever; the hens and ducks with theirsharp eyes had gathered up the very last stalk. And not an animal on thefarm had stolen so much as a mouthful.

All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. Theanimals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be. Everymouthful of food was an acute positive pleasure, now that it was trulytheir own food, produced by themselves and for themselves, not doled outto them by a grudging master. With the worthless parasitical human beingsgone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too,inexperienced though the animals were. They met with many difficulties--forinstance, later in the year, when they harvested the corn, they had totread it out in the ancient style and blow away the chaff with theirbreath, since the farm possessed no threshing machine--but the pigs withtheir cleverness and Boxer with his tremendous muscles always pulled themthrough. Boxer was the admiration of everybody. He had been a hard workereven in Jones's time, but now he seemed more like three horses than one;there were days when the entire work of the farm seemed to rest on hismighty shoulders. From morning to night he was pushing and pulling, alwaysat the spot where the work was hardest. He had made an arrangement withone of the cockerels to call him in the mornings half an hour earlier thananyone else, and would put in some volunteer labour at whatever seemed tobe most needed, before the regular day's work began. His answer to everyproblem, every setback, was "I will work harder!"--which he had adopted ashis personal motto.

But everyone worked according to his capacity. The hens and ducks, forinstance, saved five bushels of corn at the harvest by gathering up thestray grains. Nobody stole, nobody grumbled over his rations, thequarrelling and biting and jealousy which had been normal features of lifein the old days had almost disappeared. Nobody shirked--or almost nobody.Mollie, it was true, was not good at getting up in the mornings, and had away of leaving work early on the ground that there was a stone in herhoof. And the behaviour of the cat was somewhat peculiar. It was soonnoticed that when there was work to be done the cat could never be found.She would vanish for hours on end, and then reappear at meal-times, or inthe evening after work was over, as though nothing had happened. But shealways made such excellent excuses, and purred so affectionately, that itwas impossible not to believe in her good intentions. Old Benjamin, thedonkey, seemed quite unchanged since the Rebellion. He did his work in thesame slow obstinate way as he had done it in Jones's time, never shirkingand never volunteering for extra work either. About the Rebellion and itsresults he would express no opinion. When asked whether he was not happiernow that Jones was gone, he would say only "Donkeys live a long time. Noneof you has ever seen a dead donkey," and the others had to be content withthis cryptic answer.

On Sundays there was no work. Breakfast was an hour later than usual, andafter breakfast there was a ceremony which was observed every week withoutfail. First came the hoisting of the flag. Snowball had found in theharness-room an old green tablecloth of Mrs. Jones's and had painted on ita hoof and a horn in white. This was run up the flagstaff in the farmhousegarden every Sunday morning. The flag was green, Snowball explained, torepresent the green fields of England, while the hoof and horn signifiedthe future Republic of the Animals which would arise when the human racehad been finally overthrown. After the hoisting of the flag all theanimals trooped into the big barn for a general assembly which was knownas the Meeting. Here the work of the coming week was planned out andresolutions were put forward and debated. It was always the pigs who putforward the resolutions. The other animals understood how to vote, butcould never think of any resolutions of their own. Snowball and Napoleonwere by far the most active in the debates. But it was noticed that thesetwo were never in agreement: whatever suggestion either of them made, theother could be counted on to oppose it. Even when it was resolved--a thingno one could object to in itself--to set aside the small paddock behindthe orchard as a home of rest for animals who were past work, there was astormy debate over the correct retiring age for each class of animal. TheMeeting always ended with the singing of 'Beasts of England', and theafternoon was given up to recreation.

The pigs had set aside the harness-room as a headquarters for themselves.Here, in the evenings, they studied blacksmithing, carpentering, and othernecessary arts from books which they had brought out of the farmhouse.Snowball also busied himself with organising the other animals into whathe called Animal Committees. He was indefatigable at this. He formed theEgg Production Committee for the hens, the Clean Tails League for thecows, the Wild Comrades' Re-education Committee (the object of this was totame the rats and rabbits), the Whiter Wool Movement for the sheep, andvarious others, besides instituting classes in reading and writing. On thewhole, these projects were a failure. The attempt to tame the wildcreatures, for instance, broke down almost immediately. They continued tobehave very much as before, and when treated with generosity, simply tookadvantage of it. The cat joined the Re-education Committee and was veryactive in it for some days. She was seen one day sitting on a roof andtalking to some sparrows who were just out of her reach. She was tellingthem that all animals were now comrades and that any sparrow who chosecould come and perch on her paw; but the sparrows kept their distance.

The reading and writing classes, however, were a great success. By theautumn almost every animal on the farm was literate in some degree.

As for the pigs, they could already read and write perfectly. The dogslearned to read fairly well, but were not interested in reading anythingexcept the Seven Commandments. Muriel, the goat, could read somewhatbetter than the dogs, and sometimes used to read to the others in theevenings from scraps of newspaper which she found on the rubbish heap.Benjamin could read as well as any pig, but never exercised his faculty.So far as he knew, he said, there was nothing worth reading. Clover learntthe whole alphabet, but could not put words together. Boxer could not getbeyond the letter D. He would trace out A, B, C, D, in the dust with hisgreat hoof, and then would stand staring at the letters with his earsback, sometimes shaking his forelock, trying with all his might toremember what came next and never succeeding. On several occasions,indeed, he did learn E, F, G, H, but by the time he knew them, it wasalways discovered that he had forgotten A, B, C, and D. Finally he decidedto be content with the first four letters, and used to write them out onceor twice every day to refresh his memory. Mollie refused to learn any butthe six letters which spelt her own name. She would form these very neatlyout of pieces of twig, and would then decorate them with a flower or twoand walk round them admiring them.

None of the other animals on the farm could get further than the letter A.It was also found that the stupider animals, such as the sheep, hens, andducks, were unable to learn the Seven Commandments by heart. After muchthought Snowball declared that the Seven Commandments could in effect bereduced to a single maxim, namely: "Four legs good, two legs bad." This,he said, contained the essential principle of Animalism. Whoever hadthoroughly grasped it would be safe from human influences. The birds atfirst objected, since it seemed to them that they also had two legs, butSnowball proved to them that this was not so.

"A bird's wing, comrades," he said, "is an organ of propulsion and not ofmanipulation. It should therefore be regarded as a leg. The distinguishingmark of man is the HAND, the instrument with which he does all hismischief."

The birds did not understand Snowball's long words, but they accepted hisexplanation, and all the humbler animals set to work to learn the newmaxim by heart. FOUR LEGS GOOD, TWO LEGS BAD, was inscribed on the endwall of the barn, above the Seven Commandments and in bigger letters. Whenthey had once got it by heart, the sheep developed a great liking for thismaxim, and often as they lay in the field they would all start bleating"Four legs good, two legs bad! Four legs good, two legs bad!" and keep itup for hours on end, never growing tired of it.

Napoleon took no interest in Snowball's committees. He said that theeducation of the young was more important than anything that could be donefor those who were already grown up. It happened that Jessie and Bluebellhad both whelped soon after the hay harvest, giving birth between them tonine sturdy puppies. As soon as they were weaned, Napoleon took them awayfrom their mothers, saying that he would make himself responsible fortheir education. He took them up into a loft which could only be reachedby a ladder from the harness-room, and there kept them in such seclusionthat the rest of the farm soon forgot their existence.

The mystery of where the milk went to was soon cleared up. It was mixedevery day into the pigs' mash. The early apples were now ripening, and thegrass of the orchard was littered with windfalls. The animals had assumedas a matter of course that these would be shared out equally; one day,however, the order went forth that all the windfalls were to be collectedand brought to the harness-room for the use of the pigs. At this some ofthe other animals murmured, but it was no use. All the pigs were in fullagreement on this point, even Snowball and Napoleon. Squealer was sent tomake the necessary explanations to the others.

"Comrades!" he cried. "You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doingthis in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislikemilk and apples. I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking thesethings is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved byScience, comrades) contain substances absolutely necessary to thewell-being of a pig. We pigs are brainworkers. The whole management andorganisation of this farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching overyour welfare. It is for YOUR sake that we drink that milk and eat thoseapples. Do you know what would happen if we pigs failed in our duty? Joneswould come back! Yes, Jones would come back! Surely, comrades," criedSquealer almost pleadingly, skipping from side to side and whisking histail, "surely there is no one among you who wants to see Jones come back?"

Now if there was one thing that the animals were completely certain of, itwas that they did not want Jones back. When it was put to them in thislight, they had no more to say. The importance of keeping the pigs in goodhealth was all too obvious. So it was agreed without further argument thatthe milk and the windfall apples (and also the main crop of apples whenthey ripened) should be reserved for the pigs alone.







Chapter IV





By the late summer the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spreadacross half the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flightsof pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals onneighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach themthe tune of 'Beasts of England'.

Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the taproom of the RedLion at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of themonstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property bya pack of good-for-nothing animals. The other farmers sympathised inprinciple, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each ofthem was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones'smisfortune to his own advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the twofarms which adjoined Animal Farm were on permanently bad terms. One ofthem, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm,much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedgesin a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-goinggentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or huntingaccording to the season. The other farm, which was called Pinchfield, wassmaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr. Frederick, a tough, shrewdman, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hardbargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult forthem to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.

Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion onAnimal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learningtoo much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea ofanimals managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in afortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm(they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate thename "Animal Farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and werealso rapidly starving to death. When time passed and the animals hadevidently not starved to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed theirtune and began to talk of the terrible wickedness that now flourished onAnimal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised cannibalism,tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females incommon. This was what came of rebelling against the laws of Nature,Frederick and Pilkington said.

However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderfulfarm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managedtheir own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms,and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through thecountryside. Bulls which had always been tractable suddenly turned savage,sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the pailover, hunters refused their fences and shot their riders on to the otherside. Above all, the tune and even the words of 'Beasts of England' wereknown everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The human beingscould not contain their rage when they heard this song, though theypretended to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, theysaid, how even animals could bring themselves to sing such contemptiblerubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given a flogging on the spot.And yet the song was irrepressible. The blackbirds whistled it in thehedges, the pigeons cooed it in the elms, it got into the din of thesmithies and the tune of the church bells. And when the human beingslistened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of theirfuture doom.

Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it wasalready threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air andalighted in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones andall his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, hadentered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led tothe farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marchingahead with a gun in his hands. Obviously they were going to attempt therecapture of the farm.

This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball,who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar's campaigns which he hadfound in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gavehis orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at hispost.

As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched hisfirst attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to andfro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while themen were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind thehedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs.However, this was only a light skirmishing manoeuvre, intended to create alittle disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks.Snowball now launched his second line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and allthe sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and proddedand butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned around andlashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with theirsticks and their hobnailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly,at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all theanimals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemiesin flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just whatSnowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, thethree horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lyingin ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting themoff. Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashedstraight for Jones. Jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. Thepellets scored bloody streaks along Snowball's back, and a sheep droppeddead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen stoneagainst Jones's legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gunflew out of his hands. But the most terrifying spectacle of all was Boxer,rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-shodhoofs like a stallion. His very first blow took a stable-lad from Foxwoodon the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, severalmen dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and thenext moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round theyard. They were gored, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not ananimal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his ownfashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shouldersand sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a momentwhen the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of theyard and make a bolt for the main road. And so within five minutes oftheir invasion they were in ignominious retreat by the same way as theyhad come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at theircalves all the way.

All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was pawing withhis hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turnhim over. The boy did not stir.

"He is dead," said Boxer sorrowfully. "I had no intention of doing that.I forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not dothis on purpose?"

"No sentimentality, comrade!" cried Snowball from whose wounds the bloodwas still dripping. "War is war. The only good human being is a dead one."

"I have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated Boxer, andhis eyes were full of tears.

"Where is Mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it wasfeared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried heroff with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall withher head buried among the hay in the manger. She had taken to flight assoon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking forher, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only stunned, hadalready recovered and made off.

The animals had now reassembled in the wildest excitement, each recountinghis own exploits in the battle at the top of his voice. An impromptucelebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and'Beasts of England' was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had beenkilled was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on hergrave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising theneed for all animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.

The animals decided unanimously to create a military decoration, "AnimalHero, First Class," which was conferred there and then on Snowball andBoxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some oldhorse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn onSundays and holidays. There was also "Animal Hero, Second Class," whichwas conferred posthumously on the dead sheep.

There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In theend, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where theambush had been sprung. Mr. Jones's gun had been found lying in the mud,and it was known that there was a supply of cartridges in the farmhouse.It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the Flagstaff, like apiece of artillery, and to fire it twice a year--once on October thetwelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the Cowshed, and once onMidsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.







Chapter V





As winter drew on, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was latefor work every morning and excused herself by saying that she hadoverslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetitewas excellent. On every kind of pretext she would run away from work andgo to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her ownreflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something moreserious. One day, as Mollie strolled blithely into the yard, flirting herlong tail and chewing at a stalk of hay, Clover took her aside.

"Mollie," she said, "I have something very serious to say to you. Thismorning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm fromFoxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington's men was standing on the other side of thehedge. And--I was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this--hewas talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. Whatdoes that mean, Mollie?"

"He didn't! I wasn't! It isn't true!" cried Mollie, beginning to pranceabout and paw the ground.

"Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that thatman was not stroking your nose?"

"It isn't true!" repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in theface, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into thefield.

A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she wentto Mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden underthe straw was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon ofdifferent colours.

Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known ofher whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on theother side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcartpainted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fatred-faced man in check breeches and gaiters, who looked like a publican,was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newlyclipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared tobe enjoying herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals evermentioned Mollie again.

In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, andnothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the bigbarn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of thecoming season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who weremanifestly cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions offarm policy, though their decisions had to be ratified by a majority vote.This arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for thedisputes between Snowball and Napoleon. These two disagreed at every pointwhere disagreement was possible. If one of them suggested sowing a biggeracreage with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage ofoats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just rightfor cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anythingexcept roots. Each had his own following, and there were some violentdebates. At the Meetings Snowball often won over the majority by hisbrilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at canvassing support forhimself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Oflate the sheep had taken to bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad" bothin and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. Itwas noticed that they were especially liable to break into "Four legsgood, two legs bad" at crucial moments in Snowball's speeches. Snowballhad made a close study of some back numbers of the 'Farmer andStockbreeder' which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plansfor innovations and improvements. He talked learnedly about field drains,silage, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for allthe animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spotevery day, to save the labour of cartage. Napoleon produced no schemes ofhis own, but said quietly that Snowball's would come to nothing, andseemed to be biding his time. But of all their controversies, none was sobitter as the one that took place over the windmill.

In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a smallknoll which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground,Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which couldbe made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power.This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run acircular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milkingmachine. The animals had never heard of anything of this kind before(for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitivemachinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured uppictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them whilethey grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds withreading and conversation.

Within a few weeks Snowball's plans for the windmill were fully workedout. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which hadbelonged to Mr. Jones--'One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House','Every Man His Own Bricklayer', and 'Electricity for Beginners'. Snowballused as his study a shed which had once been used for incubators and had asmooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was closeted there forhours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece ofchalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidlyto and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little whimpers ofexcitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks andcog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animalsfound completely unintelligible but very impressive. All of them came tolook at Snowball's drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and duckscame, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. Only Napoleonheld aloof. He had declared himself against the windmill from the start.One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walkedheavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans andsnuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplatingthem out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg,urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowballdid not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone wouldhave to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have tobe made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (Howthese were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained thatit could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so muchlabour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three daysa week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of themoment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time onthe windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselvesinto two factions under the slogan, "Vote for Snowball and the three-dayweek" and "Vote for Napoleon and the full manger." Benjamin was the onlyanimal who did not side with either faction. He refused to believe eitherthat food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would savework. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had alwaysgone on--that is, badly.

Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of thedefence of the farm. It was fully realised that though the human beingshad been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another andmore determined attempt to recapture the farm and reinstate Mr. Jones.They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeathad spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouringfarms more restive than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were indisagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was toprocure firearms and train themselves in the use of them. According toSnowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellionamong the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they couldnot defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other arguedthat if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defendthemselves. The animals listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, andcould not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always foundthemselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

At last the day came when Snowball's plans were completed. At the Meetingon the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work onthe windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled inthe big barn, Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted bybleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for advocating the buildingof the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietlythat the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it,and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, andseemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowballsprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleatingagain, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until nowthe animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in amoment Snowball's eloquence had carried them away. In glowing sentences hepainted a picture of Animal Farm as it might be when sordid labour waslifted from the animals' backs. His imagination had now run far beyondchaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operatethreshing machines, ploughs, harrows, rollers, and reapers and binders,besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and coldwater, and an electric heater. By the time he had finished speaking, therewas no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at this momentNapoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball,uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utterbefore.

At this there was a terrible baying sound outside, and nine enormous dogswearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashedstraight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time toescape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and theywere after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animalscrowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing acrossthe long pasture that led to the road. He was running as only a pig canrun, but the dogs were close on his heels. Suddenly he slipped and itseemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again, running fasterthan ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all butclosed his jaws on Snowball's tail, but Snowball whisked it free just intime. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare,slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

Silent and terrified, the animals crept back into the barn. In a momentthe dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imaginewhere these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: theywere the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers andreared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and asfierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed thatthey wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had beenused to do to Mr. Jones.

Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raisedportion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver hisspeech. He announced that from now on the Sunday-morning Meetings wouldcome to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In futureall questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by aspecial committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet inprivate and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. Theanimals would still assemble on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing'Beasts of England', and receive their orders for the week; but there wouldbe no more debates.

In spite of the shock that Snowball's expulsion had given them, theanimals were dismayed by this announcement. Several of them would haveprotested if they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer wasvaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times,and tried hard to marshal his thoughts; but in the end he could not thinkof anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were morearticulate. Four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals ofdisapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speakingat once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out deep,menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then thesheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legsbad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to anychance of discussion.

Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangementto the others.

"Comrades," he said, "I trust that every animal here appreciates thesacrifice that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour uponhimself. Do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! On thecontrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes morefirmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be onlytoo happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes youmight make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?Suppose you had decided to follow Snowball, with his moonshine ofwindmills--Snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

"He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed," said somebody.

"Bravery is not enough," said Squealer. "Loyalty and obedience are moreimportant. And as to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time willcome when we shall find that Snowball's part in it was much exaggerated.Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword for today.One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you donot want Jones back?"

Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did notwant Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liableto bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had timeto think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "If ComradeNapoleon says it, it must be right." And from then on he adopted themaxim, "Napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "Iwill work harder."

By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun.The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shutup and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. EverySunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn toreceive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean offlesh, had been disinterred from the orchard and set up on a stump at thefoot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, theanimals were required to file past the skull in a reverent manner beforeentering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together as they had donein the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, whohad a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front ofthe raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle roundthem, and the other pigs sitting behind. The rest of the animals satfacing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the orders forthe week in a gruff soldierly style, and after a single singing of 'Beastsof England', all the animals dispersed.

On the third Sunday after Snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhatsurprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be builtafter all. He did not give any reason for having changed his mind, butmerely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work,it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however,had all been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee ofpigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. The building ofthe windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take twoyears.

That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals thatNapoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On thecontrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the planwhich Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actuallybeen stolen from among Napoleon's papers. The windmill was, in fact,Napoleon's own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken sostrongly against it? Here Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, wasComrade Napoleon's cunning. He had SEEMED to oppose the windmill, simplyas a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous character and abad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could goforward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was somethingcalled tactics. He repeated a number of times, "Tactics, comrades,tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. Theanimals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke sopersuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled sothreateningly, that they accepted his explanation without furtherquestions.







Chapter VI





All that year the animals worked like slaves. But they were happy in theirwork; they grudged no effort or sacrifice, well aware that everything thatthey did was for the benefit of themselves and those of their kind whowould come after them, and not for a pack of idle, thieving human beings.

Throughout the spring and summer they worked a sixty-hour week, and inAugust Napoleon announced that there would be work on Sunday afternoonsas well. This work was strictly voluntary, but any animal who absentedhimself from it would have his rations reduced by half. Even so, it wasfound necessary to leave certain tasks undone. The harvest was a littleless successful than in the previous year, and two fields which shouldhave been sown with roots in the early summer were not sown because theploughing had not been completed early enough. It was possible to foreseethat the coming winter would be a hard one.

The windmill presented unexpected difficulties. There was a good quarry oflimestone on the farm, and plenty of sand and cement had been found in oneof the outhouses, so that all the materials for building were at hand. Butthe problem the animals could not at first solve was how to break up thestone into pieces of suitable size. There seemed no way of doing thisexcept with picks and crowbars, which no animal could use, because noanimal could stand on his hind legs. Only after weeks of vain effort didthe right idea occur to somebody-namely, to utilise the force of gravity.Huge boulders, far too big to be used as they were, were lying all overthe bed of the quarry. The animals lashed ropes round these, and then alltogether, cows, horses, sheep, any animal that could lay hold of therope--even the pigs sometimes joined in at critical moments--they draggedthem with desperate slowness up the slope to the top of the quarry, wherethey were toppled over the edge, to shatter to pieces below. Transportingthe stone when it was once broken was comparatively simple. The horsescarried it off in cart-loads, the sheep dragged single blocks, even Murieland Benjamin yoked themselves into an old governess-cart and did theirshare. By late summer a sufficient store of stone had accumulated, andthen the building began, under the superintendence of the pigs.

But it was a slow, laborious process. Frequently it took a whole day ofexhausting effort to drag a single boulder to the top of the quarry, andsometimes when it was pushed over the edge it failed to break. Nothingcould have been achieved without Boxer, whose strength seemed equal tothat of all the rest of the animals put together. When the boulder beganto slip and the animals cried out in despair at finding themselves draggeddown the hill, it was always Boxer who strained himself against the ropeand brought the boulder to a stop. To see him toiling up the slope inch byinch, his breath coming fast, the tips of his hoofs clawing at the ground,and his great sides matted with sweat, filled everyone with admiration.Clover warned him sometimes to be careful not to overstrain himself, butBoxer would never listen to her. His two slogans, "I will work harder"and "Napoleon is always right," seemed to him a sufficient answer to allproblems. He had made arrangements with the cockerel to call himthree-quarters of an hour earlier in the mornings instead of half an hour.And in his spare moments, of which there were not many nowadays, he wouldgo alone to the quarry, collect a load of broken stone, and drag it downto the site of the windmill unassisted.

The animals were not badly off throughout that summer, in spite of thehardness of their work. If they had no more food than they had had inJones's day, at least they did not have less. The advantage of only havingto feed themselves, and not having to support five extravagant humanbeings as well, was so great that it would have taken a lot of failures tooutweigh it. And in many ways the animal method of doing things was moreefficient and saved labour. Such jobs as weeding, for instance, could bedone with a thoroughness impossible to human beings. And again, since noanimal now stole, it was unnecessary to fence off pasture from arableland, which saved a lot of labour on the upkeep of hedges and gates.Nevertheless, as the summer wore on, various unforeseen shortages began tomake them selves felt. There was need of paraffin oil, nails, string, dogbiscuits, and iron for the horses' shoes, none of which could be producedon the farm. Later there would also be need for seeds and artificialmanures, besides various tools and, finally, the machinery for thewindmill. How these were to be procured, no one was able to imagine.

One Sunday morning, when the animals assembled to receive their orders,Napoleon announced that he had decided upon a new policy. From now onwardsAnimal Farm would engage in trade with the neighbouring farms: not, ofcourse, for any commercial purpose, but simply in order to obtain certainmaterials which were urgently necessary. The needs of the windmill mustoverride everything else, he said. He was therefore making arrangements tosell a stack of hay and part of the current year's wheat crop, and lateron, if more money were needed, it would have to be made up by the sale ofeggs, for which there was always a market in Willingdon. The hens, saidNapoleon, should welcome this sacrifice as their own special contributiontowards the building of the windmill.

Once again the animals were conscious of a vague uneasiness. Never to haveany dealings with human beings, never to engage in trade, never to makeuse of money--had not these been among the earliest resolutions passed atthat first triumphant Meeting after Jones was expelled? All the animalsremembered passing such resolutions: or at least they thought that theyremembered it. The four young pigs who had protested when Napoleonabolished the Meetings raised their voices timidly, but they were promptlysilenced by a tremendous growling from the dogs. Then, as usual, the sheepbroke into "Four legs good, two legs bad!" and the momentary awkwardnesswas smoothed over. Finally Napoleon raised his trotter for silence andannounced that he had already made all the arrangements. There would be noneed for any of the animals to come in contact with human beings, whichwould clearly be most undesirable. He intended to take the whole burdenupon his own shoulders. A Mr. Whymper, a solicitor living in Willingdon,had agreed to act as intermediary between Animal Farm and the outsideworld, and would visit the farm every Monday morning to receive hisinstructions. Napoleon ended his speech with his usual cry of "Long liveAnimal Farm!" and after the singing of 'Beasts of England' the animalswere dismissed.

Afterwards Squealer made a round of the farm and set the animals' minds atrest. He assured them that the resolution against engaging in trade andusing money had never been passed, or even suggested. It was pureimagination, probably traceable in the beginning to lies circulated bySnowball. A few animals still felt faintly doubtful, but Squealer askedthem shrewdly, "Are you certain that this is not something that you havedreamed, comrades? Have you any record of such a resolution? Is it writtendown anywhere?" And since it was certainly true that nothing of the kindexisted in writing, the animals were satisfied that they had been mistaken.

Every Monday Mr. Whymper visited the farm as had been arranged. He was asly-looking little man with side whiskers, a solicitor in a very small wayof business, but sharp enough to have realised earlier than anyone elsethat Animal Farm would need a broker and that the commissions would beworth having. The animals watched his coming and going with a kind ofdread, and avoided him as much as possible. Nevertheless, the sight ofNapoleon, on all fours, delivering orders to Whymper, who stood on twolegs, roused their pride and partly reconciled them to the newarrangement. Their relations with the human race were now not quite thesame as they had been before. The human beings did not hate Animal Farmany less now that it was prospering; indeed, they hated it more than ever.Every human being held it as an article of faith that the farm would gobankrupt sooner or later, and, above all, that the windmill would be afailure. They would meet in the public-houses and prove to one another bymeans of diagrams that the windmill was bound to fall down, or that if itdid stand up, then that it would never work. And yet, against their will,they had developed a certain respect for the efficiency with which theanimals were managing their own affairs. One symptom of this was that theyhad begun to call Animal Farm by its proper name and ceased to pretendthat it was called the Manor Farm. They had also dropped their championshipof Jones, who had given up hope of getting his farm back and gone to livein another part of the county. Except through Whymper, there was as yet nocontact between Animal Farm and the outside world, but there were constantrumours that Napoleon was about to enter into a definite business agreementeither with Mr. Pilkington of Foxwood or with Mr. Frederick ofPinchfield--but never, it was noticed, with both simultaneously.

It was about this time that the pigs suddenly moved into the farmhouse andtook up their residence there. Again the animals seemed to remember that aresolution against this had been passed in the early days, and againSquealer was able to convince them that this was not the case. It wasabsolutely necessary, he said, that the pigs, who were the brains of thefarm, should have a quiet place to work in. It was also more suited to thedignity of the Leader (for of late he had taken to speaking of Napoleonunder the title of "Leader") to live in a house than in a mere sty.Nevertheless, some of the animals were disturbed when they heard that thepigs not only took their meals in the kitchen and used the drawing-roomas a recreation room, but also slept in the beds. Boxer passed it off asusual with "Napoleon is always right!", but Clover, who thought sheremembered a definite ruling against beds, went to the end of the barn andtried to puzzle out the Seven Commandments which were inscribed there.Finding herself unable to read more than individual letters, she fetchedMuriel.

"Muriel," she said, "read me the Fourth Commandment. Does it not saysomething about never sleeping in a bed?"

With some difficulty Muriel spelt it out.

"It says, 'No animal shall sleep in a bed with sheets,"' she announcedfinally.

Curiously enough, Clover had not remembered that the Fourth Commandmentmentioned sheets; but as it was there on the wall, it must have done so.And Squealer, who happened to be passing at this moment, attended by twoor three dogs, was able to put the whole matter in its proper perspective.

"You have heard then, comrades," he said, "that we pigs now sleep in thebeds of the farmhouse? And why not? You did not suppose, surely, thatthere was ever a ruling against beds? A bed merely means a place to sleepin. A pile of straw in a stall is a bed, properly regarded. The rule wasagainst sheets, which are a human invention. We have removed the sheetsfrom the farmhouse beds, and sleep between blankets. And very comfortablebeds they are too! But not more comfortable than we need, I can tell you,comrades, with all the brainwork we have to do nowadays. You would not robus of our repose, would you, comrades? You would not have us too tired tocarry out our duties? Surely none of you wishes to see Jones back?"

The animals reassured him on this point immediately, and no more was saidabout the pigs sleeping in the farmhouse beds. And when, some daysafterwards, it was announced that from now on the pigs would get up anhour later in the mornings than the other animals, no complaint was madeabout that either.

By the autumn the animals were tired but happy. They had had a hard year,and after the sale of part of the hay and corn, the stores of food for thewinter were none too plentiful, but the windmill compensated foreverything. It was almost half built now. After the harvest there was astretch of clear dry weather, and the animals toiled harder than ever,thinking it well worth while to plod to and fro all day with blocks ofstone if by doing so they could raise the walls another foot. Boxer wouldeven come out at nights and work for an hour or two on his own by thelight of the harvest moon. In their spare moments the animals would walkround and round the half-finished mill, admiring the strength andperpendicularity of its walls and marvelling that they should ever havebeen able to build anything so imposing. Only old Benjamin refused to growenthusiastic about the windmill, though, as usual, he would utter nothingbeyond the cryptic remark that donkeys live a long time.

November came, with raging south-west winds. Building had to stop becauseit was now too wet to mix the cement. Finally there came a night when thegale was so violent that the farm buildings rocked on their foundationsand several tiles were blown off the roof of the barn. The hens woke upsquawking with terror because they had all dreamed simultaneously ofhearing a gun go off in the distance. In the morning the animals came outof their stalls to find that the flagstaff had been blown down and an elmtree at the foot of the orchard had been plucked up like a radish. Theyhad just noticed this when a cry of despair broke from every animal'sthroat. A terrible sight had met their eyes. The windmill was in ruins.

With one accord they dashed down to the spot. Napoleon, who seldom movedout of a walk, raced ahead of them all. Yes, there it lay, the fruit ofall their struggles, levelled to its foundations, the stones they hadbroken and carried so laboriously scattered all around. Unable at first tospeak, they stood gazing mournfully at the litter of fallen stone. Napoleonpaced to and fro in silence, occasionally snuffing at the ground. His tailhad grown rigid and twitched sharply from side to side, a sign in him ofintense mental activity. Suddenly he halted as though his mind weremade up.

"Comrades," he said quietly, "do you know who is responsible for this? Doyou know the enemy who has come in the night and overthrown our windmill?SNOWBALL!" he suddenly roared in a voice of thunder. "Snowball has donethis thing! In sheer malignity, thinking to set back our plans and avengehimself for his ignominious expulsion, this traitor has crept here undercover of night and destroyed our work of nearly a year. Comrades, hereand now I pronounce the death sentence upon Snowball. 'Animal Hero, SecondClass,' and half a bushel of apples to any animal who brings him tojustice. A full bushel to anyone who captures him alive!"

The animals were shocked beyond measure to learn that even Snowball couldbe guilty of such an action. There was a cry of indignation, and everyonebegan thinking out ways of catching Snowball if he should ever come back.Almost immediately the footprints of a pig were discovered in the grass ata little distance from the knoll. They could only be traced for a fewyards, but appeared to lead to a hole in the hedge. Napoleon snuffeddeeply at them and pronounced them to be Snowball's. He gave it as hisopinion that Snowball had probably come from the direction of Foxwood Farm.

"No more delays, comrades!" cried Napoleon when the footprints had beenexamined. "There is work to be done. This very morning we begin rebuildingthe windmill, and we will build all through the winter, rain or shine. Wewill teach this miserable traitor that he cannot undo our work so easily.Remember, comrades, there must be no alteration in our plans: they shallbe carried out to the day. Forward, comrades! Long live the windmill! Longlive Animal Farm!"







Chapter VII





It was a bitter winter. The stormy weather was followed by sleet and snow,and then by a hard frost which did not break till well into February. Theanimals carried on as best they could with the rebuilding of the windmill,well knowing that the outside world was watching them and that the envioushuman beings would rejoice and triumph if the mill were not finishedon time.

Out of spite, the human beings pretended not to believe that it wasSnowball who had destroyed the windmill: they said that it had fallen downbecause the walls were too thin. The animals knew that this was not thecase. Still, it had been decided to build the walls three feet thick thistime instead of eighteen inches as before, which meant collecting muchlarger quantities of stone. For a long time the quarry was full ofsnowdrifts and nothing could be done. Some progress was made in the dryfrosty weather that followed, but it was cruel work, and the animals couldnot feel so hopeful about it as they had felt before. They were alwayscold, and usually hungry as well. Only Boxer and Clover never lost heart.Squealer made excellent speeches on the joy of service and the dignity oflabour, but the other animals found more inspiration in Boxer's strengthand his never-failing cry of "I will work harder!"

In January food fell short. The corn ration was drastically reduced, andit was announced that an extra potato ration would be issued to make upfor it. Then it was discovered that the greater part of the potato crophad been frosted in the clamps, which had not been covered thickly enough.The potatoes had become soft and discoloured, and only a few were edible.For days at a time the animals had nothing to eat but chaff and mangels.Starvation seemed to stare them in the face.

It was vitally necessary to conceal this fact from the outside world.Emboldened by the collapse of the windmill, the human beings wereinventing fresh lies about Animal Farm. Once again it was being put aboutthat all the animals were dying of famine and disease, and that they werecontinually fighting among themselves and had resorted to cannibalism andinfanticide. Napoleon was well aware of the bad results that might followif the real facts of the food situation were known, and he decided to makeuse of Mr. Whymper to spread a contrary impression. Hitherto the animalshad had little or no contact with Whymper on his weekly visits: now,however, a few selected animals, mostly sheep, were instructed to remarkcasually in his hearing that rations had been increased. In addition,Napoleon ordered the almost empty bins in the store-shed to be fillednearly to the brim with sand, which was then covered up with what remainedof the grain and meal. On some suitable pretext Whymper was led throughthe store-shed and allowed to catch a glimpse of the bins. He wasdeceived, and continued to report to the outside world that there was nofood shortage on Animal Farm.

Nevertheless, towards the end of January it became obvious that it wouldbe necessary to procure some more grain from somewhere. In these daysNapoleon rarely appeared in public, but spent all his time in thefarmhouse, which was guarded at each door by fierce-looking dogs. When hedid emerge, it was in a ceremonial manner, with an escort of six dogs whoclosely surrounded him and growled if anyone came too near. Frequently hedid not even appear on Sunday mornings, but issued his orders through oneof the other pigs, usually Squealer.

One Sunday morning Squealer announced that the hens, who had just come into lay again, must surrender their eggs. Napoleon had accepted, throughWhymper, a contract for four hundred eggs a week. The price of these wouldpay for enough grain and meal to keep the farm going till summer came onand conditions were easier.

When the hens heard this, they raised a terrible outcry. They had beenwarned earlier that this sacrifice might be necessary, but had notbelieved that it would really happen. They were just getting theirclutches ready for the spring sitting, and they protested that to take theeggs away now was murder. For the first time since the expulsion of Jones,there was something resembling a rebellion. Led by three young BlackMinorca pullets, the hens made a determined effort to thwart Napoleon'swishes. Their method was to fly up to the rafters and there lay theireggs, which smashed to pieces on the floor. Napoleon acted swiftly andruthlessly. He ordered the hens' rations to be stopped, and decreed thatany animal giving so much as a grain of corn to a hen should be punishedby death. The dogs saw to it that these orders were carried out. For fivedays the hens held out, then they capitulated and went back to theirnesting boxes. Nine hens had died in the meantime. Their bodies wereburied in the orchard, and it was given out that they had died ofcoccidiosis. Whymper heard nothing of this affair, and the eggs were dulydelivered, a grocer's van driving up to the farm once a week to take themaway.

All this while no more had been seen of Snowball. He was rumoured to behiding on one of the neighbouring farms, either Foxwood or Pinchfield.Napoleon was by this time on slightly better terms with the other farmersthan before. It happened that there was in the yard a pile of timber whichhad been stacked there ten years earlier when a beech spinney was cleared.It was well seasoned, and Whymper had advised Napoleon to sell it; bothMr. Pilkington and Mr. Frederick were anxious to buy it. Napoleon washesitating between the two, unable to make up his mind. It was noticedthat whenever he seemed on the point of coming to an agreement withFrederick, Snowball was declared to be in hiding at Foxwood, while, whenhe inclined toward Pilkington, Snowball was said to be at Pinchfield.

Suddenly, early in the spring, an alarming thing was discovered. Snowballwas secretly frequenting the farm by night! The animals were so disturbedthat they could hardly sleep in their stalls. Every night, it was said, hecame creeping in under cover of darkness and performed all kinds ofmischief. He stole the corn, he upset the milk-pails, he broke the eggs,he trampled the seedbeds, he gnawed the bark off the fruit trees. Wheneveranything went wrong it became usual to attribute it to Snowball. If awindow was broken or a drain was blocked up, someone was certain to saythat Snowball had come in the night and done it, and when the key of thestore-shed was lost, the whole farm was convinced that Snowball had thrownit down the well. Curiously enough, they went on believing this even afterthe mislaid key was found under a sack of meal. The cows declaredunanimously that Snowball crept into their stalls and milked them in theirsleep. The rats, which had been troublesome that winter, were also said tobe in league with Snowball.

Napoleon decreed that there should be a full investigation into Snowball'sactivities. With his dogs in attendance he set out and made a careful tourof inspection of the farm buildings, the other animals following at arespectful distance. At every few steps Napoleon stopped and snuffed theground for traces of Snowball's footsteps, which, he said, he could detectby the smell. He snuffed in every corner, in the barn, in the cow-shed,in the henhouses, in the vegetable garden, and found traces of Snowballalmost everywhere. He would put his snout to the ground, give several deepsniffs, ad exclaim in a terrible voice, "Snowball! He has been here! I cansmell him distinctly!" and at the word "Snowball" all the dogs let outblood-curdling growls and showed their side teeth.

The animals were thoroughly frightened. It seemed to them as thoughSnowball were some kind of invisible influence, pervading the air aboutthem and menacing them with all kinds of dangers. In the evening Squealercalled them together, and with an alarmed expression on his face toldthem that he had some serious news to report.

"Comrades!" cried Squealer, making little nervous skips, "a most terriblething has been discovered. Snowball has sold himself to Frederick ofPinchfield Farm, who is even now plotting to attack us and take our farmaway from us! Snowball is to act as his guide when the attack begins. Butthere is worse than that. We had thought that Snowball's rebellion wascaused simply by his vanity and ambition. But we were wrong, comrades. Doyou know what the real reason was? Snowball was in league with Jones fromthe very start! He was Jones's secret agent all the time. It has all beenproved by documents which he left behind him and which we have only justdiscovered. To my mind this explains a great deal, comrades. Did we notsee for ourselves how he attempted--fortunately without success--to get usdefeated and destroyed at the Battle of the Cowshed?"

The animals were stupefied. This was a wickedness far outdoing Snowball'sdestruction of the windmill. But it was some minutes before they couldfully take it in. They all remembered, or thought they remembered, howthey had seen Snowball charging ahead of them at the Battle of theCowshed, how he had rallied and encouraged them at every turn, and how hehad not paused for an instant even when the pellets from Jones's gun hadwounded his back. At first it was a little difficult to see how thisfitted in with his being on Jones's side. Even Boxer, who seldom askedquestions, was puzzled. He lay down, tucked his fore hoofs beneath him,shut his eyes, and with a hard effort managed to formulate his thoughts.

"I do not believe that," he said. "Snowball fought bravely at the Battleof the Cowshed. I saw him myself. Did we not give him 'Animal Hero, firstClass,' immediately afterwards?"

"That was our mistake, comrade. For we know now--it is all written down inthe secret documents that we have found--that in reality he was trying tolure us to our doom."

"But he was wounded," said Boxer. "We all saw him running with blood."

"That was part of the arrangement!" cried Squealer. "Jones's shot onlygrazed him. I could show you this in his own writing, if you were able toread it. The plot was for Snowball, at the critical moment, to give thesignal for flight and leave the field to the enemy. And he very nearlysucceeded--I will even say, comrades, he WOULD have succeeded if it hadnot been for our heroic Leader, Comrade Napoleon. Do you not remember how,just at the moment when Jones and his men had got inside the yard,Snowball suddenly turned and fled, and many animals followed him? And doyou not remember, too, that it was just at that moment, when panic wasspreading and all seemed lost, that Comrade Napoleon sprang forward with acry of 'Death to Humanity!' and sank his teeth in Jones's leg? Surely youremember THAT, comrades?" exclaimed Squealer, frisking from side to side.

Now when Squealer described the scene so graphically, it seemed to theanimals that they did remember it. At any rate, they remembered that atthe critical moment of the battle Snowball had turned to flee. But Boxerwas still a little uneasy.

"I do not believe that Snowball was a traitor at the beginning," he saidfinally. "What he has done since is different. But I believe that at theBattle of the Cowshed he was a good comrade."

"Our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," announced Squealer, speaking very slowlyand firmly, "has stated categorically--categorically, comrade--thatSnowball was Jones's agent from the very beginning--yes, and from longbefore the Rebellion was ever thought of."

"Ah, that is different!" said Boxer. "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it mustbe right."

"That is the true spirit, comrade!" cried Squealer, but it was noticed hecast a very ugly look at Boxer with his little twinkling eyes. He turnedto go, then paused and added impressively: "I warn every animal on thisfarm to keep his eyes very wide open. For we have reason to think thatsome of Snowball's secret agents are lurking among us at this moment!"

Four days later, in the late afternoon, Napoleon ordered all the animalsto assemble in the yard. When they were all gathered together, Napoleonemerged from the farmhouse, wearing both his medals (for he had recentlyawarded himself "Animal Hero, First Class", and "Animal Hero, SecondClass"), with his nine huge dogs frisking round him and uttering growlsthat sent shivers down all the animals' spines. They all cowered silentlyin their places, seeming to know in advance that some terrible thing wasabout to happen.

Napoleon stood sternly surveying his audience; then he uttered ahigh-pitched whimper. Immediately the dogs bounded forward, seized four ofthe pigs by the ear and dragged them, squealing with pain and terror, toNapoleon's feet. The pigs' ears were bleeding, the dogs had tasted blood,and for a few moments they appeared to go quite mad. To the amazement ofeverybody, three of them flung themselves upon Boxer. Boxer saw themcoming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air, and pinnedhim to the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled withtheir tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whetherhe should crush the dog to death or let it go. Napoleon appeared to changecountenance, and sharply ordered Boxer to let the dog go, whereat Boxerlifted his hoof, and the dog slunk away, bruised and howling.

Presently the tumult died down. The four pigs waited, trembling, withguilt written on every line of their countenances. Napoleon now calledupon them to confess their crimes. They were the same four pigs as hadprotested when Napoleon abolished the Sunday Meetings. Without any furtherprompting they confessed that they had been secretly in touch withSnowball ever since his expulsion, that they had collaborated with him indestroying the windmill, and that they had entered into an agreement withhim to hand over Animal Farm to Mr. Frederick. They added that Snowballhad privately admitted to them that he had been Jones's secret agent foryears past. When they had finished their confession, the dogs promptlytore their throats out, and in a terrible voice Napoleon demanded whetherany other animal had anything to confess.

The three hens who had been the ringleaders in the attempted rebellionover the eggs now came forward and stated that Snowball had appeared tothem in a dream and incited them to disobey Napoleon's orders. They, too,were slaughtered. Then a goose came forward and confessed to havingsecreted six ears of corn during the last year's harvest and eaten them inthe night. Then a sheep confessed to having urinated in the drinkingpool--urged to do this, so she said, by Snowball--and two other sheepconfessed to having murdered an old ram, an especially devoted follower ofNapoleon, by chasing him round and round a bonfire when he was sufferingfrom a cough. They were all slain on the spot. And so the tale ofconfessions and executions went on, until there was a pile of corpseslying before Napoleon's feet and the air was heavy with the smell ofblood, which had been unknown there since the expulsion of Jones.

When it was all over, the remaining animals, except for the pigs and dogs,crept away in a body. They were shaken and miserable. They did not knowwhich was more shocking--the treachery of the animals who had leaguedthemselves with Snowball, or the cruel retribution they had justwitnessed. In the old days there had often been scenes of bloodshedequally terrible, but it seemed to all of them that it was far worse nowthat it was happening among themselves. Since Jones had left the farm,until today, no animal had killed another animal. Not even a rat had beenkilled. They had made their way on to the little knoll where thehalf-finished windmill stood, and with one accord they all lay down asthough huddling together for warmth--Clover, Muriel, Benjamin, the cows,the sheep, and a whole flock of geese and hens--everyone, indeed, exceptthe cat, who had suddenly disappeared just before Napoleon ordered theanimals to assemble. For some time nobody spoke. Only Boxer remained onhis feet. He fidgeted to and fro, swishing his long black tail against hissides and occasionally uttering a little whinny of surprise. Finally hesaid:

"I do not understand it. I would not have believed that such things couldhappen on our farm. It must be due to some fault in ourselves. Thesolution, as I see it, is to work harder. From now onwards I shall get upa full hour earlier in the mornings."

And he moved off at his lumbering trot and made for the quarry. Having gotthere, he collected two successive loads of stone and dragged them down tothe windmill before retiring for the night.

The animals huddled about Clover, not speaking. The knoll where they werelying gave them a wide prospect across the countryside. Most of AnimalFarm was within their view--the long pasture stretching down to the mainroad, the hayfield, the spinney, the drinking pool, the ploughed fieldswhere the young wheat was thick and green, and the red roofs of the farmbuildings with the smoke curling from the chimneys. It was a clear springevening. The grass and the bursting hedges were gilded by the level raysof the sun. Never had the farm--and with a kind of surprise theyremembered that it was their own farm, every inch of it their ownproperty--appeared to the animals so desirable a place. As Clover lookeddown the hillside her eyes filled with tears. If she could have spoken herthoughts, it would have been to say that this was not what they had aimedat when they had set themselves years ago to work for the overthrow of thehuman race. These scenes of terror and slaughter were not what they hadlooked forward to on that night when old Major first stirred them torebellion. If she herself had had any picture of the future, it had beenof a society of animals set free from hunger and the whip, all equal, eachworking according to his capacity, the strong protecting the weak, as shehad protected the lost brood of ducklings with her foreleg on the night ofMajor's speech. Instead--she did not know why--they had come to a timewhen no one dared speak his mind, when fierce, growling dogs roamedeverywhere, and when you had to watch your comrades torn to pieces afterconfessing to shocking crimes. There was no thought of rebellion ordisobedience in her mind. She knew that, even as things were, they werefar better off than they had been in the days of Jones, and that beforeall else it was needful to prevent the return of the human beings.Whatever happened she would remain faithful, work hard, carry out theorders that were given to her, and accept the leadership of Napoleon. Butstill, it was not for this that she and all the other animals had hopedand toiled. It was not for this that they had built the windmill and facedthe bullets of Jones's gun. Such were her thoughts, though she lacked thewords to express them.

At last, feeling this to be in some way a substitute for the words she wasunable to find, she began to sing 'Beasts of England'. The other animalssitting round her took it up, and they sang it three times over--verytunefully, but slowly and mournfully, in a way they had never sung itbefore.

They had just finished singing it for the third time when Squealer,attended by two dogs, approached them with the air of having somethingimportant to say. He announced that, by a special decree of ComradeNapoleon, 'Beasts of England' had been abolished. From now onwards it wasforbidden to sing it.

The animals were taken aback.

"Why?" cried Muriel.

"It's no longer needed, comrade," said Squealer stiffly. "'Beasts ofEngland' was the song of the Rebellion. But the Rebellion is nowcompleted. The execution of the traitors this afternoon was the final act.The enemy both external and internal has been defeated. In 'Beasts ofEngland' we expressed our longing for a better society in days to come.But that society has now been established. Clearly this song has no longerany purpose."

Frightened though they were, some of the animals might possibly haveprotested, but at this moment the sheep set up their usual bleating of"Four legs good, two legs bad," which went on for several minutes and putan end to the discussion.

So 'Beasts of England' was heard no more. In its place Minimus, the poet,had composed another song which began:



Animal Farm, Animal Farm,Never through me shalt thou come to harm!



and this was sung every Sunday morning after the hoisting of the flag.But somehow neither the words nor the tune ever seemed to the animals tocome up to 'Beasts of England'.







Chapter VIII





A few days later, when the terror caused by the executions had died down,some of the animals remembered--or thought they remembered--that the SixthCommandment decreed "No animal shall kill any other animal." And though noone cared to mention it in the hearing of the pigs or the dogs, it wasfelt that the killings which had taken place did not square with this.Clover asked Benjamin to read her the Sixth Commandment, and whenBenjamin, as usual, said that he refused to meddle in such matters, shefetched Muriel. Muriel read the Commandment for her. It ran: "No animalshall kill any other animal WITHOUT CAUSE." Somehow or other, the last twowords had slipped out of the animals' memory. But they saw now that theCommandment had not been violated; for clearly there was good reason forkilling the traitors who had leagued themselves with Snowball.

Throughout the year the animals worked even harder than they had worked inthe previous year. To rebuild the windmill, with walls twice as thick asbefore, and to finish it by the appointed date, together with the regularwork of the farm, was a tremendous labour. There were times when it seemedto the animals that they worked longer hours and fed no better than theyhad done in Jones's day. On Sunday mornings Squealer, holding down a longstrip of paper with his trotter, would read out to them lists of figuresproving that the production of every class of foodstuff had increased bytwo hundred per cent, three hundred per cent, or five hundred per cent,as the case might be. The animals saw no reason to disbelieve him,especially as they could no longer remember very clearly what conditionshad been like before the Rebellion. All the same, there were days whenthey felt that they would sooner have had less figures and more food.

All orders were now issued through Squealer or one of the other pigs.Napoleon himself was not seen in public as often as once in a fortnight.When he did appear, he was attended not only by his retinue of dogs but bya black cockerel who marched in front of him and acted as a kind oftrumpeter, letting out a loud "cock-a-doodle-doo" before Napoleon spoke.Even in the farmhouse, it was said, Napoleon inhabited separate apartmentsfrom the others. He took his meals alone, with two dogs to wait upon him,and always ate from the Crown Derby dinner service which had been in theglass cupboard in the drawing-room. It was also announced that the gunwould be fired every year on Napoleon's birthday, as well as on the othertwo anniversaries.

Napoleon was now never spoken of simply as "Napoleon." He was alwaysreferred to in formal style as "our Leader, Comrade Napoleon," and thispigs liked to invent for him such titles as Father of All Animals, Terrorof Mankind, Protector of the Sheep-fold, Ducklings' Friend, and the like.In his speeches, Squealer would talk with the tears rolling down hischeeks of Napoleon's wisdom the goodness of his heart, and the deep lovehe bore to all animals everywhere, even and especially the unhappy animalswho still lived in ignorance and slavery on other farms. It had becomeusual to give Napoleon the credit for every successful achievement andevery stroke of good fortune. You would often hear one hen remark toanother, "Under the guidance of our Leader, Comrade Napoleon, I have laidfive eggs in six days"; or two cows, enjoying a drink at the pool, wouldexclaim, "Thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon, how excellent thiswater tastes!" The general feeling on the farm was well expressed in apoem entitled Comrade Napoleon, which was composed by Minimus and whichran as follows:



Friend of fatherless!Fountain of happiness!Lord of the swill-bucket! Oh, how my soul is onFire when I gaze at thyCalm and commanding eye,Like the sun in the sky,Comrade Napoleon!

Thou are the giver ofAll that thy creatures love,Full belly twice a day, clean straw to roll upon;Every beast great or smallSleeps at peace in his stall,Thou watchest over all,Comrade Napoleon!

Had I a sucking-pig,Ere he had grown as bigEven as a pint bottle or as a rolling-pin,He should have learned to beFaithful and true to thee,Yes, his first squeak should be"Comrade Napoleon!"



Napoleon approved of this poem and caused it to be inscribed on the wallof the big barn, at the opposite end from the Seven Commandments. It wassurmounted by a portrait of Napoleon, in profile, executed by Squealer inwhite paint.

Meanwhile, through the agency of Whymper, Napoleon was engaged incomplicated negotiations with Frederick and Pilkington. The pile of timberwas still unsold. Of the two, Frederick was the more anxious to get holdof it, but he would not offer a reasonable price. At the same time therewere renewed rumours that Frederick and his men were plotting to attackAnimal Farm and to destroy the windmill, the building of which had arousedfurious jealousy in him. Snowball was known to be still skulking onPinchfield Farm. In the middle of the summer the animals were alarmed tohear that three hens had come forward and confessed that, inspired bySnowball, they had entered into a plot to murder Napoleon. They wereexecuted immediately, and fresh precautions for Napoleon's safety weretaken. Four dogs guarded his bed at night, one at each corner, and a youngpig named Pinkeye was given the task of tasting all his food before he ateit, lest it should be poisoned.

At about the same time it was given out that Napoleon had arranged to sellthe pile of timber to Mr. Pilkington; he was also going to enter into aregular agreement for the exchange of certain products between Animal Farmand Foxwood. The relations between Napoleon and Pilkington, though theywere only conducted through Whymper, were now almost friendly. The animalsdistrusted Pilkington, as a human being, but greatly preferred him toFrederick, whom they both feared and hated. As the summer wore on, and thewindmill neared completion, the rumours of an impending treacherous attackgrew stronger and stronger. Frederick, it was said, intended to bringagainst them twenty men all armed with guns, and he had already bribed themagistrates and police, so that if he could once get hold of thetitle-deeds of Animal Farm they would ask no questions. Moreover, terriblestories were leaking out from Pinchfield about the cruelties thatFrederick practised upon his animals. He had flogged an old horse todeath, he starved his cows, he had killed a dog by throwing it into thefurnace, he amused himself in the evenings by making cocks fight withsplinters of razor-blade tied to their spurs. The animals' blood boiledwith rage when they heard of these things being done to their comrades,and sometimes they clamoured to be allowed to go out in a body and attackPinchfield Farm, drive out the humans, and set the animals free. ButSquealer counselled them to avoid rash actions and trust in ComradeNapoleon's strategy.

Nevertheless, feeling against Frederick continued to run high. One Sundaymorning Napoleon appeared in the barn and explained that he had never atany time contemplated selling the pile of timber to Frederick; heconsidered it beneath his dignity, he said, to have dealings withscoundrels of that description. The pigeons who were still sent out tospread tidings of the Rebellion were forbidden to set foot anywhere onFoxwood, and were also ordered to drop their former slogan of "Death toHumanity" in favour of "Death to Frederick." In the late summer yetanother of Snowball's machinations was laid bare. The wheat crop was fullof weeds, and it was discovered that on one of his nocturnal visitsSnowball had mixed weed seeds with the seed corn. A gander who had beenprivy to the plot had confessed his guilt to Squealer and immediatelycommitted suicide by swallowing deadly nightshade berries. The animalsnow also learned that Snowball had never--as many of them had believedhitherto--received the order of "Animal Hero, First Class." This wasmerely a legend which had been spread some time after the Battle of theCowshed by Snowball himself. So far from being decorated, he had beencensured for showing cowardice in the battle. Once again some of theanimals heard this with a certain bewilderment, but Squealer was soon ableto convince them that their memories had been at fault.

In the autumn, by a tremendous, exhausting effort--for the harvest had tobe gathered at almost the same time--the windmill was finished. Themachinery had still to be installed, and Whymper was negotiating thepurchase of it, but the structure was completed. In the teeth of everydifficulty, in spite of inexperience, of primitive implements, of bad luckand of Snowball's treachery, the work had been finished punctually to thevery day! Tired out but proud, the animals walked round and round theirmasterpiece, which appeared even more beautiful in their eyes than when ithad been built the first time. Moreover, the walls were twice as thick asbefore. Nothing short of explosives would lay them low this time! And whenthey thought of how they had laboured, what discouragements they hadovercome, and the enormous difference that would be made in their liveswhen the sails were turning and the dynamos running--when they thought ofall this, their tiredness forsook them and they gambolled round and roundthe windmill, uttering cries of triumph. Napoleon himself, attended by hisdogs and his cockerel, came down to inspect the completed work; hepersonally congratulated the animals on their achievement, and announcedthat the mill would be named Napoleon Mill.

Two days later the animals were called together for a special meeting inthe barn. They were struck dumb with surprise when Napoleon announced thathe had sold the pile of timber to Frederick. Tomorrow Frederick's wagonswould arrive and begin carting it away. Throughout the whole period of hisseeming friendship with Pilkington, Napoleon had really been in secretagreement with Frederick.

All relations with Foxwood had been broken off; insulting messages hadbeen sent to Pilkington. The pigeons had been told to avoid PinchfieldFarm and to alter their slogan from "Death to Frederick" to "Death toPilkington." At the same time Napoleon assured the animals that thestories of an impending attack on Animal Farm were completely untrue, andthat the tales about Frederick's cruelty to his own animals had beengreatly exaggerated. All these rumours had probably originated withSnowball and his agents. It now appeared that Snowball was not, after all,hiding on Pinchfield Farm, and in fact had never been there in his life:he was living--in considerable luxury, so it was said--at Foxwood, and hadin reality been a pensioner of Pilkington for years past.

The pigs were in ecstasies over Napoleon's cunning. By seeming to befriendly with Pilkington he had forced Frederick to raise his price bytwelve pounds. But the superior quality of Napoleon's mind, said Squealer,was shown in the fact that he trusted nobody, not even Frederick.Frederick had wanted to pay for the timber with something called a cheque,which, it seemed, was a piece of paper with a promise to pay written uponit. But Napoleon was too clever for him. He had demanded payment in realfive-pound notes, which were to be handed over before the timber wasremoved. Already Frederick had paid up; and the sum he had paid was justenough to buy the machinery for the windmill.

Meanwhile the timber was being carted away at high speed. When it was allgone, another special meeting was held in the barn for the animals toinspect Frederick's bank-notes. Smiling beatifically, and wearing both hisdecorations, Napoleon reposed on a bed of straw on the platform, with themoney at his side, neatly piled on a china dish from the farmhousekitchen. The animals filed slowly past, and each gazed his fill. And Boxerput out his nose to sniff at the bank-notes, and the flimsy white thingsstirred and rustled in his breath.

Three days later there was a terrible hullabaloo. Whymper, his face deadlypale, came racing up the path on his bicycle, flung it down in the yardand rushed straight into the farmhouse. The next moment a choking roar ofrage sounded from Napoleon's apartments. The news of what had happenedsped round the farm like wildfire. The banknotes were forgeries! Frederickhad got the timber for nothing!

Napoleon called the animals together immediately and in a terrible voicepronounced the death sentence upon Frederick. When captured, he said,Frederick should be boiled alive. At the same time he warned them thatafter this treacherous deed the worst was to be expected. Frederick andhis men might make their long-expected attack at any moment. Sentinelswere placed at all the approaches to the farm. In addition, four pigeonswere sent to Foxwood with a conciliatory message, which it was hoped mightre-establish good relations with Pilkington.

The very next morning the attack came. The animals were at breakfast whenthe look-outs came racing in with the news that Frederick and hisfollowers had already come through the five-barred gate. Boldly enough theanimals sallied forth to meet them, but this time they did not have theeasy victory that they had had in the Battle of the Cowshed. There werefifteen men, with half a dozen guns between them, and they opened fire assoon as they got within fifty yards. The animals could not face theterrible explosions and the stinging pellets, and in spite of the effortsof Napoleon and Boxer to rally them, they were soon driven back. A numberof them were already wounded. They took refuge in the farm buildings andpeeped cautiously out from chinks and knot-holes. The whole of the bigpasture, including the windmill, was in the hands of the enemy. For themoment even Napoleon seemed at a loss. He paced up and down without aword, his tail rigid and twitching. Wistful glances were sent in thedirection of Foxwood. If Pilkington and his men would help them, the daymight yet be won. But at this moment the four pigeons, who had been sentout on the day before, returned, one of them bearing a scrap of paper fromPilkington. On it was pencilled the words: "Serves you right."

Meanwhile Frederick and his men had halted about the windmill. The animalswatched them, and a murmur of dismay went round. Two of the men hadproduced a crowbar and a sledge hammer. They were going to knock thewindmill down.

"Impossible!" cried Napoleon. "We have built the walls far too thick forthat. They could not knock it down in a week. Courage, comrades!"

But Benjamin was watching the movements of the men intently. The two withthe hammer and the crowbar were drilling a hole near the base of thewindmill. Slowly, and with an air almost of amusement, Benjamin nodded hislong muzzle.

"I thought so," he said. "Do you not see what they are doing? In anothermoment they are going to pack blasting powder into that hole."

Terrified, the animals waited. It was impossible now to venture out of theshelter of the buildings. After a few minutes the men were seen to berunning in all directions. Then there was a deafening roar. The pigeonsswirled into the air, and all the animals, except Napoleon, flungthemselves flat on their bellies and hid their faces. When they got upagain, a huge cloud of black smoke was hanging where the windmill hadbeen. Slowly the breeze drifted it away. The windmill had ceased to exist!

At this sight the animals' courage returned to them. The fear and despairthey had felt a moment earlier were drowned in their rage against thisvile, contemptible act. A mighty cry for vengeance went up, and withoutwaiting for further orders they charged forth in a body and made straightfor the enemy. This time they did not heed the cruel pellets that sweptover them like hail. It was a savage, bitter battle. The men fired againand again, and, when the animals got to close quarters, lashed out withtheir sticks and their heavy boots. A cow, three sheep, and two geese werekilled, and nearly everyone was wounded. Even Napoleon, who was directingoperations from the rear, had the tip of his tail chipped by a pellet. Butthe men did not go unscathed either. Three of them had their heads brokenby blows from Boxer's hoofs; another was gored in the belly by a cow'shorn; another had his trousers nearly torn off by Jessie and Bluebell. Andwhen the nine dogs of Napoleon's own bodyguard, whom he had instructed tomake a detour under cover of the hedge, suddenly appeared on the men'sflank, baying ferociously, panic overtook them. They saw that they were indanger of being surrounded. Frederick shouted to his men to get out whilethe going was good, and the next moment the cowardly enemy was running fordear life. The animals chased them right down to the bottom of the field,and got in some last kicks at them as they forced their way through thethorn hedge.

They had won, but they were weary and bleeding. Slowly they began to limpback towards the farm. The sight of their dead comrades stretched upon thegrass moved some of them to tears. And for a little while they halted insorrowful silence at the place where the windmill had once stood. Yes, itwas gone; almost the last trace of their labour was gone! Even thefoundations were partially destroyed. And in rebuilding it they could notthis time, as before, make use of the fallen stones. This time the stoneshad vanished too. The force of the explosion had flung them to distancesof hundreds of yards. It was as though the windmill had never been.

As they approached the farm Squealer, who had unaccountably been absentduring the fighting, came skipping towards them, whisking his tail andbeaming with satisfaction. And the animals heard, from the direction ofthe farm buildings, the solemn booming of a gun.

"What is that gun firing for?" said Boxer.

"To celebrate our victory!" cried Squealer.

"What victory?" said Boxer. His knees were bleeding, he had lost a shoeand split his hoof, and a dozen pellets had lodged themselves in his hindleg.

"What victory, comrade? Have we not driven the enemy off our soil--thesacred soil of Animal Farm?"

"But they have destroyed the windmill. And we had worked on it for twoyears!"

"What matter? We will build another windmill. We will build six windmillsif we feel like it. You do not appreciate, comrade, the mighty thing thatwe have done. The enemy was in occupation of this very ground that westand upon. And now--thanks to the leadership of Comrade Napoleon--we havewon every inch of it back again!"

"Then we have won back what we had before," said Boxer.

"That is our victory," said Squealer.

They limped into the yard. The pellets under the skin of Boxer's legsmarted painfully. He saw ahead of him the heavy labour of rebuilding thewindmill from the foundations, and already in imagination he bracedhimself for the task. But for the first time it occurred to him that hewas eleven years old and that perhaps his great muscles were not quitewhat they had once been.

But when the animals saw the green flag flying, and heard the gun firingagain--seven times it was fired in all--and heard the speech that Napoleonmade, congratulating them on their conduct, it did seem to them after allthat they had won a great victory. The animals slain in the battle weregiven a solemn funeral. Boxer and Clover pulled the wagon which served asa hearse, and Napoleon himself walked at the head of the procession. Twowhole days were given over to celebrations. There were songs, speeches,and more firing of the gun, and a special gift of an apple was bestowed onevery animal, with two ounces of corn for each bird and three biscuits foreach dog. It was announced that the battle would be called the Battle ofthe Windmill, and that Napoleon had created a new decoration, the Orderof the Green Banner, which he had conferred upon himself. In the generalrejoicings the unfortunate affair of the banknotes was forgotten.

It was a few days later than this that the pigs came upon a case of whiskyin the cellars of the farmhouse. It had been overlooked at the time whenthe house was first occupied. That night there came from the farmhouse thesound of loud singing, in which, to everyone's surprise, the strains of'Beasts of England' were mixed up. At about half past nine Napoleon,wearing an old bowler hat of Mr. Jones's, was distinctly seen to emergefrom the back door, gallop rapidly round the yard, and disappear indoorsagain. But in the morning a deep silence hung over the farmhouse. Not apig appeared to be stirring. It was nearly nine o'clock when Squealer madehis appearance, walking slowly and dejectedly, his eyes dull, his tailhanging limply behind him, and with every appearance of being seriouslyill. He called the animals together and told them that he had a terriblepiece of news to impart. Comrade Napoleon was dying!

A cry of lamentation went up. Straw was laid down outside the doors of thefarmhouse, and the animals walked on tiptoe. With tears in their eyes theyasked one another what they should do if their Leader were taken away fromthem. A rumour went round that Snowball had after all contrived tointroduce poison into Napoleon's food. At eleven o'clock Squealer cameout to make another announcement. As his last act upon earth, ComradeNapoleon had pronounced a solemn decree: the drinking of alcohol was to bepunished by death.

By the evening, however, Napoleon appeared to be somewhat better, and thefollowing morning Squealer was able to tell them that he was well on theway to recovery. By the evening of that day Napoleon was back at work, andon the next day it was learned that he had instructed Whymper to purchasein Willingdon some booklets on brewing and distilling. A week laterNapoleon gave orders that the small paddock beyond the orchard, which ithad previously been intended to set aside as a grazing-ground for animalswho were past work, was to be ploughed up. It was given out that thepasture was exhausted and needed re-seeding; but it soon became known thatNapoleon intended to sow it with barley.

About this time there occurred a strange incident which hardly anyone wasable to understand. One night at about twelve o'clock there was a loudcrash in the yard, and the animals rushed out of their stalls. It was amoonlit night. At the foot of the end wall of the big barn, where theSeven Commandments were written, there lay a ladder broken in two pieces.Squealer, temporarily stunned, was sprawling beside it, and near at handthere lay a lantern, a paint-brush, and an overturned pot of white paint.The dogs immediately made a ring round Squealer, and escorted him back tothe farmhouse as soon as he was able to walk. None of the animals couldform any idea as to what this meant, except old Benjamin, who nodded hismuzzle with a knowing air, and seemed to understand, but would say nothing.

But a few days later Muriel, reading over the Seven Commandments toherself, noticed that there was yet another of them which the animals hadremembered wrong. They had thought the Fifth Commandment was "No animalshall drink alcohol," but there were two words that they had forgotten.Actually the Commandment read: "No animal shall drink alcohol TO EXCESS."







Chapter IX





Boxer's split hoof was a long time in healing. They had started therebuilding of the windmill the day after the victory celebrations wereended. Boxer refused to take even a day off work, and made it a point ofhonour not to let it be seen that he was in pain. In the evenings he wouldadmit privately to Clover that the hoof troubled him a great deal. Clovertreated the hoof with poultices of herbs which she prepared by chewingthem, and both she and Benjamin urged Boxer to work less hard. "A horse'slungs do not last for ever," she said to him. But Boxer would not listen.He had, he said, only one real ambition left--to see the windmill wellunder way before he reached the age for retirement.

At the beginning, when the laws of Animal Farm were first formulated,the retiring age had been fixed for horses and pigs at twelve, for cows atfourteen, for dogs at nine, for sheep at seven, and for hens and geese atfive. Liberal old-age pensions had been agreed upon. As yet no animal hadactually retired on pension, but of late the subject had been discussedmore and more. Now that the small field beyond the orchard had been setaside for barley, it was rumoured that a corner of the large pasture wasto be fenced off and turned into a grazing-ground for superannuatedanimals. For a horse, it was said, the pension would be five pounds ofcorn a day and, in winter, fifteen pounds of hay, with a carrot orpossibly an apple on public holidays. Boxer's twelfth birthday was due inthe late summer of the following year.

Meanwhile life was hard. The winter was as cold as the last one had been,and food was even shorter. Once again all rations were reduced, exceptthose of the pigs and the dogs. A too rigid equality in rations, Squealerexplained, would have been contrary to the principles of Animalism. In anycase he had no difficulty in proving to the other animals that they wereNOT in reality short of food, whatever the appearances might be. For thetime being, certainly, it had been found necessary to make a readjustmentof rations (Squealer always spoke of it as a "readjustment," never as a"reduction"), but in comparison with the days of Jones, the improvementwas enormous. Reading out the figures in a shrill, rapid voice, he provedto them in detail that they had more oats, more hay, more turnips thanthey had had in Jones's day, that they worked shorter hours, that theirdrinking water was of better quality, that they lived longer, that alarger proportion of their young ones survived infancy, and that they hadmore straw in their stalls and suffered less from fleas. The animalsbelieved every word of it. Truth to tell, Jones and all he stood for hadalmost faded out of their memories. They knew that life nowadays was harshand bare, that they were often hungry and often cold, and that they wereusually working when they were not asleep. But doubtless it had been worsein the old days. They were glad to believe so. Besides, in those days theyhad been slaves and now they were free, and that made all the difference,as Squealer did not fail to point out.

There were many more mouths to feed now. In the autumn the four sows hadall littered about simultaneously, producing thirty-one young pigs betweenthem. The young pigs were piebald, and as Napoleon was the only boar onthe farm, it was possible to guess at their parentage. It was announcedthat later, when bricks and timber had been purchased, a schoolroom wouldbe built in the farmhouse garden. For the time being, the young pigs weregiven their instruction by Napoleon himself in the farmhouse kitchen. Theytook their exercise in the garden, and were discouraged from playing withthe other young animals. About this time, too, it was laid down as a rulethat when a pig and any other animal met on the path, the other animalmust stand aside: and also that all pigs, of whatever degree, were to havethe privilege of wearing green ribbons on their tails on Sundays.

The farm had had a fairly successful year, but was still short of money.There were the bricks, sand, and lime for the schoolroom to be purchased,and it would also be necessary to begin saving up again for the machineryfor the windmill. Then there were lamp oil and candles for the house,sugar for Napoleon's own table (he forbade this to the other pigs, on theground that it made them fat), and all the usual replacements such astools, nails, string, coal, wire, scrap-iron, and dog biscuits. A stump ofhay and part of the potato crop were sold off, and the contract for eggswas increased to six hundred a week, so that that year the hens barelyhatched enough chicks to keep their numbers at the same level. Rations,reduced in December, were reduced again in February, and lanterns in thestalls were forbidden to save oil. But the pigs seemed comfortable enough,and in fact were putting on weight if anything. One afternoon in lateFebruary a warm, rich, appetising scent, such as the animals had neversmelt before, wafted itself across the yard from the little brew-house,which had been disused in Jones's time, and which stood beyond thekitchen. Someone said it was the smell of cooking barley. The animalssniffed the air hungrily and wondered whether a warm mash was beingprepared for their supper. But no warm mash appeared, and on the followingSunday it was announced that from now onwards all barley would be reservedfor the pigs. The field beyond the orchard had already been sown withbarley. And the news soon leaked out that every pig was now receiving aration of a pint of beer daily, with half a gallon for Napoleon himself,which was always served to him in the Crown Derby soup tureen.

But if there were hardships to be borne, they were partly offset by thefact that life nowadays had a greater dignity than it had had before.There were more songs, more speeches, more processions. Napoleon hadcommanded that once a week there should be held something called aSpontaneous Demonstration, the object of which was to celebrate thestruggles and triumphs of Animal Farm. At the appointed time the animalswould leave their work and march round the precincts of the farm inmilitary formation, with the pigs leading, then the horses, then the cows,then the sheep, and then the poultry. The dogs flanked the procession andat the head of all marched Napoleon's black cockerel. Boxer and Cloveralways carried between them a green banner marked with the hoof and thehorn and the caption, "Long live Comrade Napoleon!" Afterwards there wererecitations of poems composed in Napoleon's honour, and a speech bySquealer giving particulars of the latest increases in the production offoodstuffs, and on occasion a shot was fired from the gun. The sheep werethe greatest devotees of the Spontaneous Demonstration, and if anyonecomplained (as a few animals sometimes did, when no pigs or dogs were near)that they wasted time and meant a lot of standing about in the cold, thesheep were sure to silence him with a tremendous bleating of "Four legsgood, two legs bad!" But by and large the animals enjoyed thesecelebrations. They found it comforting to be reminded that, after all,they were truly their own masters and that the work they did was for theirown benefit. So that, what with the songs, the processions, Squealer'slists of figures, the thunder of the gun, the crowing of the cockerel,and the fluttering of the flag, they were able to forget that theirbellies were empty, at least part of the time.

In April, Animal Farm was proclaimed a Republic, and it became necessaryto elect a President. There was only one candidate, Napoleon, who waselected unanimously. On the same day it was given out that fresh documentshad been discovered which revealed further details about Snowball'scomplicity with Jones. It now appeared that Snowball had not, as theanimals had previously imagined, merely attempted to lose the Battle ofthe Cowshed by means of a stratagem, but had been openly fighting onJones's side. In fact, it was he who had actually been the leader of thehuman forces, and had charged into battle with the words "Long liveHumanity!" on his lips. The wounds on Snowball's back, which a few of theanimals still remembered to have seen, had been inflicted by Napoleon'steeth.

In the middle of the summer Moses the raven suddenly reappeared on thefarm, after an absence of several years. He was quite unchanged, still didno work, and talked in the same strain as ever about Sugarcandy Mountain.He would perch on a stump, flap his black wings, and talk by the hour toanyone who would listen. "Up there, comrades," he would say solemnly,pointing to the sky with his large beak--"up there, just on the other sideof that dark cloud that you can see--there it lies, Sugarcandy Mountain,that happy country where we poor animals shall rest for ever from ourlabours!" He even claimed to have been there on one of his higher flights,and to have seen the everlasting fields of clover and the linseed cake andlump sugar growing on the hedges. Many of the animals believed him. Theirlives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right andjust that a better world should exist somewhere else? A thing that wasdifficult to determine was the attitude of the pigs towards Moses. Theyall declared contemptuously that his stories about Sugarcandy Mountainwere lies, and yet they allowed him to remain on the farm, not working,with an allowance of a gill of beer a day.

After his hoof had healed up, Boxer worked harder than ever. Indeed, allthe animals worked like slaves that year. Apart from the regular work ofthe farm, and the rebuilding of the windmill, there was the schoolhousefor the young pigs, which was started in March. Sometimes the long hourson insufficient food were hard to bear, but Boxer never faltered. Innothing that he said or did was there any sign that his strength was notwhat it had been. It was only his appearance that was a little altered;his hide was less shiny than it had used to be, and his great haunchesseemed to have shrunken. The others said, "Boxer will pick up when thespring grass comes on"; but the spring came and Boxer grew no fatter.Sometimes on the slope leading to the top of the quarry, when he bracedhis muscles against the weight of some vast boulder, it seemed thatnothing kept him on his feet except the will to continue. At such timeshis lips were seen to form the words, "I will work harder"; he had novoice left. Once again Clover and Benjamin warned him to take care of hishealth, but Boxer paid no attention. His twelfth birthday was approaching.He did not care what happened so long as a good store of stone wasaccumulated before he went on pension.

Late one evening in the summer, a sudden rumour ran round the farm thatsomething had happened to Boxer. He had gone out alone to drag a load ofstone down to the windmill. And sure enough, the rumour was true. A fewminutes later two pigeons came racing in with the news; "Boxer has fallen!He is lying on his side and can't get up!"

About half the animals on the farm rushed out to the knoll where thewindmill stood. There lay Boxer, between the shafts of the cart, his neckstretched out, unable even to raise his head. His eyes were glazed, hissides matted with sweat. A thin stream of blood had trickled out of hismouth. Clover dropped to her knees at his side.

"Boxer!" she cried, "how are you?"

"It is my lung," said Boxer in a weak voice. "It does not matter. I thinkyou will be able to finish the windmill without me. There is a pretty goodstore of stone accumulated. I had only another month to go in any case.To tell you the truth, I had been looking forward to my retirement. Andperhaps, as Benjamin is growing old too, they will let him retire at thesame time and be a companion to me."

"We must get help at once," said Clover. "Run, somebody, and tell Squealerwhat has happened."

All the other animals immediately raced back to the farmhouse to giveSquealer the news. Only Clover remained, and Benjamin who lay down atBoxer's side, and, without speaking, kept the flies off him with his longtail. After about a quarter of an hour Squealer appeared, full of sympathyand concern. He said that Comrade Napoleon had learned with the verydeepest distress of this misfortune to one of the most loyal workers onthe farm, and was already making arrangements to send Boxer to be treatedin the hospital at Willingdon. The animals felt a little uneasy at this.Except for Mollie and Snowball, no other animal had ever left the farm,and they did not like to think of their sick comrade in the hands of humanbeings. However, Squealer easily convinced them that the veterinarysurgeon in Willingdon could treat Boxer's case more satisfactorily thancould be done on the farm. And about half an hour later, when Boxer hadsomewhat recovered, he was with difficulty got on to his feet, and managedto limp back to his stall, where Clover and Benjamin had prepared a goodbed of straw for him.

For the next two days Boxer remained in his stall. The pigs had sent out alarge bottle of pink medicine which they had found in the medicine chestin the bathroom, and Clover administered it to Boxer twice a day aftermeals. In the evenings she lay in his stall and talked to him, whileBenjamin kept the flies off him. Boxer professed not to be sorry for whathad happened. If he made a good recovery, he might expect to live anotherthree years, and he looked forward to the peaceful days that he wouldspend in the corner of the big pasture. It would be the first time that hehad had leisure to study and improve his mind. He intended, he said, todevote the rest of his life to learning the remaining twenty-two lettersof the alphabet.

However, Benjamin and Clover could only be with Boxer after working hours,and it was in the middle of the day when the van came to take him away.The animals were all at work weeding turnips under the supervision of apig, when they were astonished to see Benjamin come galloping from thedirection of the farm buildings, braying at the top of his voice. It wasthe first time that they had ever seen Benjamin excited--indeed, it wasthe first time that anyone had ever seen him gallop. "Quick, quick!" heshouted. "Come at once! They're taking Boxer away!" Without waiting fororders from the pig, the animals broke off work and raced back to the farmbuildings. Sure enough, there in the yard was a large closed van, drawn bytwo horses, with lettering on its side and a sly-looking man in alow-crowned bowler hat sitting on the driver's seat. And Boxer's stall wasempty.

The animals crowded round the van. "Good-bye, Boxer!" they chorused,"good-bye!"

"Fools! Fools!" shouted Benjamin, prancing round them and stamping theearth with his small hoofs. "Fools! Do you not see what is written on theside of that van?"

That gave the animals pause, and there was a hush. Muriel began to spellout the words. But Benjamin pushed her aside and in the midst of a deadlysilence he read:

"'Alfred Simmonds, Horse Slaughterer and Glue Boiler, Willingdon. Dealerin Hides and Bone-Meal. Kennels Supplied.' Do you not understand what thatmeans? They are taking Boxer to the knacker's!"

A cry of horror burst from all the animals. At this moment the man on thebox whipped up his horses and the van moved out of the yard at a smarttrot. All the animals followed, crying out at the tops of their voices.Clover forced her way to the front. The van began to gather speed. Clovertried to stir her stout limbs to a gallop, and achieved a canter. "Boxer!"she cried. "Boxer! Boxer! Boxer!" And just at this moment, as though hehad heard the uproar outside, Boxer's face, with the white stripe down hisnose, appeared at the small window at the back of the van.

"Boxer!" cried Clover in a terrible voice. "Boxer! Get out! Get outquickly! They're taking you to your death!"

All the animals took up the cry of "Get out, Boxer, get out!" But the vanwas already gathering speed and drawing away from them. It was uncertainwhether Boxer had understood what Clover had said. But a moment later hisface disappeared from the window and there was the sound of a tremendousdrumming of hoofs inside the van. He was trying to kick his way out. Thetime had been when a few kicks from Boxer's hoofs would have smashed thevan to matchwood. But alas! his strength had left him; and in a fewmoments the sound of drumming hoofs grew fainter and died away. Indesperation the animals began appealing to the two horses which drew thevan to stop. "Comrades, comrades!" they shouted. "Don't take your ownbrother to his death!" But the stupid brutes, too ignorant to realisewhat was happening, merely set back their ears and quickened their pace.Boxer's face did not reappear at the window. Too late, someone thought ofracing ahead and shutting the five-barred gate; but in another moment thevan was through it and rapidly disappearing down the road. Boxer was neverseen again.

Three days later it was announced that he had died in the hospital atWillingdon, in spite of receiving every attention a horse could have.Squealer came to announce the news to the others. He had, he said, beenpresent during Boxer's last hours.

"It was the most affecting sight I have ever seen!" said Squealer, liftinghis trotter and wiping away a tear. "I was at his bedside at the verylast. And at the end, almost too weak to speak, he whispered in my earthat his sole sorrow was to have passed on before the windmill wasfinished. 'Forward, comrades!' he whispered. 'Forward in the name of theRebellion. Long live Animal Farm! Long live Comrade Napoleon! Napoleon isalways right.' Those were his very last words, comrades."

Here Squealer's demeanour suddenly changed. He fell silent for a moment,and his little eyes darted suspicious glances from side to side before heproceeded.

It had come to his knowledge, he said, that a foolish and wicked rumourhad been circulated at the time of Boxer's removal. Some of the animalshad noticed that the van which took Boxer away was marked "HorseSlaughterer," and had actually jumped to the conclusion that Boxer wasbeing sent to the knacker's. It was almost unbelievable, said Squealer,that any animal could be so stupid. Surely, he cried indignantly, whiskinghis tail and skipping from side to side, surely they knew their belovedLeader, Comrade Napoleon, better than that? But the explanation was reallyvery simple. The van had previously been the property of the knacker, andhad been bought by the veterinary surgeon, who had not yet painted the oldname out. That was how the mistake had arisen.

The animals were enormously relieved to hear this. And when Squealer wenton to give further graphic details of Boxer's death-bed, the admirablecare he had received, and the expensive medicines for which Napoleon hadpaid without a thought as to the cost, their last doubts disappeared andthe sorrow that they felt for their comrade's death was tempered by thethought that at least he had died happy.

Napoleon himself appeared at the meeting on the following Sunday morningand pronounced a short oration in Boxer's honour. It had not beenpossible, he said, to bring back their lamented comrade's remains forinterment on the farm, but he had ordered a large wreath to be made fromthe laurels in the farmhouse garden and sent down to be placed on Boxer'sgrave. And in a few days' time the pigs intended to hold a memorialbanquet in Boxer's honour. Napoleon ended his speech with a reminder ofBoxer's two favourite maxims, "I will work harder" and "Comrade Napoleonis always right"--maxims, he said, which every animal would do well toadopt as his own.

On the day appointed for the banquet, a grocer's van drove up fromWillingdon and delivered a large wooden crate at the farmhouse. That nightthere was the sound of uproarious singing, which was followed by whatsounded like a violent quarrel and ended at about eleven o'clock with atremendous crash of glass. No one stirred in the farmhouse before noon onthe following day, and the word went round that from somewhere or otherthe pigs had acquired the money to buy themselves another case of whisky.







Chapter X





Years passed. The seasons came and went, the short animal lives fled by.A time came when there was no one who remembered the old days before theRebellion, except Clover, Benjamin, Moses the raven, and a number of thepigs.

Muriel was dead; Bluebell, Jessie, and Pincher were dead. Jones too wasdead--he had died in an inebriates' home in another part of the country.Snowball was forgotten. Boxer was forgotten, except by the few who hadknown him. Clover was an old stout mare now, stiff in the joints and witha tendency to rheumy eyes. She was two years past the retiring age, but infact no animal had ever actually retired. The talk of setting aside acorner of the pasture for superannuated animals had long since beendropped. Napoleon was now a mature boar of twenty-four stone. Squealer wasso fat that he could with difficulty see out of his eyes. Only oldBenjamin was much the same as ever, except for being a little greyer aboutthe muzzle, and, since Boxer's death, more morose and taciturn than ever.

There were many more creatures on the farm now, though the increase wasnot so great as had been expected in earlier years. Many animals had beenborn to whom the Rebellion was only a dim tradition, passed on by word ofmouth, and others had been bought who had never heard mention of such athing before their arrival. The farm possessed three horses now besidesClover. They were fine upstanding beasts, willing workers and goodcomrades, but very stupid. None of them proved able to learn the alphabetbeyond the letter B. They accepted everything that they were told aboutthe Rebellion and the principles of Animalism, especially from Clover, forwhom they had an almost filial respect; but it was doubtful whether theyunderstood very much of it.

The farm was more prosperous now, and better organised: it had even beenenlarged by two fields which had been bought from Mr. Pilkington. Thewindmill had been successfully completed at last, and the farm possessed athreshing machine and a hay elevator of its own, and various new buildingshad been added to it. Whymper had bought himself a dogcart. The windmill,however, had not after all been used for generating electrical power. Itwas used for milling corn, and brought in a handsome money profit. Theanimals were hard at work building yet another windmill; when that one wasfinished, so it was said, the dynamos would be installed. But the luxuriesof which Snowball had once taught the animals to dream, the stalls withelectric light and hot and cold water, and the three-day week, were nolonger talked about. Napoleon had denounced such ideas as contrary to thespirit of Animalism. The truest happiness, he said, lay in working hardand living frugally.

Somehow it seemed as though the farm had grown richer without making theanimals themselves any richer-except, of course, for the pigs and thedogs. Perhaps this was partly because there were so many pigs and so manydogs. It was not that these creatures did not work, after their fashion.There was, as Squealer was never tired of explaining, endless work in thesupervision and organisation of the farm. Much of this work was of a kindthat the other animals were too ignorant to understand. For example,Squealer told them that the pigs had to expend enormous labours every dayupon mysterious things called "files," "reports," "minutes," and"memoranda". These were large sheets of paper which had to be closelycovered with writing, and as soon as they were so covered, they were burntin the furnace. This was of the highest importance for the welfare of thefarm, Squealer said. But still, neither pigs nor dogs produced any food bytheir own labour; and there were very many of them, and their appetiteswere always good.

As for the others, their life, so far as they knew, was as it had alwaysbeen. They were generally hungry, they slept on straw, they drank from thepool, they laboured in the fields; in winter they were troubled by thecold, and in summer by the flies. Sometimes the older ones among themracked their dim memories and tried to determine whether in the earlydays of the Rebellion, when Jones's expulsion was still recent, things hadbeen better or worse than now. They could not remember. There was nothingwith which they could compare their present lives: they had nothing to goupon except Squealer's lists of figures, which invariably demonstratedthat everything was getting better and better. The animals found theproblem insoluble; in any case, they had little time for speculating onsuch things now. Only old Benjamin professed to remember every detail ofhis long life and to know that things never had been, nor ever could bemuch better or much worse--hunger, hardship, and disappointment being, sohe said, the unalterable law of life.

And yet the animals never gave up hope. More, they never lost, even for aninstant, their sense of honour and privilege in being members of AnimalFarm. They were still the only farm in the whole county--in allEngland!--owned and operated by animals. Not one of them, not even theyoungest, not even the newcomers who had been brought from farms ten ortwenty miles away, ever ceased to marvel at that. And when they heard thegun booming and saw the green flag fluttering at the masthead, theirhearts swelled with imperishable pride, and the talk turned always towardsthe old heroic days, the expulsion of Jones, the writing of the SevenCommandments, the great battles in which the human invaders had beendefeated. None of the old dreams had been abandoned. The Republic of theAnimals which Major had foretold, when the green fields of England shouldbe untrodden by human feet, was still believed in. Some day it was coming:it might not be soon, it might not be with in the lifetime of any animalnow living, but still it was coming. Even the tune of 'Beasts of England'was perhaps hummed secretly here and there: at any rate, it was a factthat every animal on the farm knew it, though no one would have dared tosing it aloud. It might be that their lives were hard and that not all oftheir hopes had been fulfilled; but they were conscious that they were notas other animals. If they went hungry, it was not from feeding tyrannicalhuman beings; if they worked hard, at least they worked for themselves.No creature among them went upon two legs. No creature called any othercreature "Master." All animals were equal.

One day in early summer Squealer ordered the sheep to follow him, and ledthem out to a piece of waste ground at the other end of the farm, whichhad become overgrown with birch saplings. The sheep spent the whole daythere browsing at the leaves under Squealer's supervision. In the eveninghe returned to the farmhouse himself, but, as it was warm weather, toldthe sheep to stay where they were. It ended by their remaining there for awhole week, during which time the other animals saw nothing of them.Squealer was with them for the greater part of every day. He was, he said,teaching them to sing a new song, for which privacy was needed.

It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant evening when theanimals had finished work and were making their way back to the farmbuildings, that the terrified neighing of a horse sounded from the yard.Startled, the animals stopped in their tracks. It was Clover's voice. Sheneighed again, and all the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into theyard. Then they saw what Clover had seen.

It was a pig walking on his hind legs.

Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite used tosupporting his considerable bulk in that position, but with perfectbalance, he was strolling across the yard. And a moment later, out fromthe door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all walking on theirhind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trifleunsteady and looked as though they would have liked the support of astick, but every one of them made his way right round the yardsuccessfully. And finally there was a tremendous baying of dogs and ashrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came Napoleon himself,majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and withhis dogs gambolling round him.

He carried a whip in his trotter.

There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, theanimals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It wasas though the world had turned upside-down. Then there came a moment whenthe first shock had worn off and when, in spite of everything-in spite oftheir terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through long years,of never complaining, never criticising, no matter what happened--theymight have uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, asthough at a signal, all the sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of--

"Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Four legs good, two legs BETTER! Fourlegs good, two legs BETTER!"

It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheephad quieted down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigshad marched back into the farmhouse.

Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It wasClover. Her old eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, shetugged gently at his mane and led him round to the end of the big barn,where the Seven Commandments were written. For a minute or two they stoodgazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.

"My sight is failing," she said finally. "Even when I was young I couldnot have read what was written there. But it appears to me that that walllooks different. Are the Seven Commandments the same as they used to be,Benjamin?"

For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her whatwas written on the wall. There was nothing there now except a singleCommandment. It ran:

ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUALBUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS

After that it did not seem strange when next day the pigs who weresupervising the work of the farm all carried whips in their trotters. Itdid not seem strange to learn that the pigs had bought themselves awireless set, were arranging to install a telephone, and had taken outsubscriptions to 'John Bull', 'Tit-Bits', and the 'Daily Mirror'. It didnot seem strange when Napoleon was seen strolling in the farmhouse gardenwith a pipe in his mouth--no, not even when the pigs took Mr. Jones'sclothes out of the wardrobes and put them on, Napoleon himself appearingin a black coat, ratcatcher breeches, and leather leggings, while hisfavourite sow appeared in the watered silk dress which Mrs. Jones had beenused to wearing on Sundays.

A week later, in the afternoon, a number of dog-carts drove up to the farm.A deputation of neighbouring farmers had been invited to make a tour ofinspection. They were shown all over the farm, and expressed greatadmiration for everything they saw, especially the windmill. The animalswere weeding the turnip field. They worked diligently hardly raising theirfaces from the ground, and not knowing whether to be more frightened ofthe pigs or of the human visitors.

That evening loud laughter and bursts of singing came from the farmhouse.And suddenly, at the sound of the mingled voices, the animals werestricken with curiosity. What could be happening in there, now that forthe first time animals and human beings were meeting on terms of equality?With one accord they began to creep as quietly as possible into thefarmhouse garden.

At the gate they paused, half frightened to go on but Clover led the wayin. They tiptoed up to the house, and such animals as were tall enoughpeered in at the dining-room window. There, round the long table, sat halfa dozen farmers and half a dozen of the more eminent pigs, Napoleonhimself occupying the seat of honour at the head of the table. The pigsappeared completely at ease in their chairs. The company had been enjoyinga game of cards but had broken off for the moment, evidently in order todrink a toast. A large jug was circulating, and the mugs were beingrefilled with beer. No one noticed the wondering faces of the animals thatgazed in at the window.

Mr. Pilkington, of Foxwood, had stood up, his mug in his hand. In amoment, he said, he would ask the present company to drink a toast. Butbefore doing so, there were a few words that he felt it incumbent upon himto say.

It was a source of great satisfaction to him, he said--and, he was sure,to all others present--to feel that a long period of mistrust andmisunderstanding had now come to an end. There had been a time--not thathe, or any of the present company, had shared such sentiments--but therehad been a time when the respected proprietors of Animal Farm had beenregarded, he would not say with hostility, but perhaps with a certainmeasure of misgiving, by their human neighbours. Unfortunate incidents hadoccurred, mistaken ideas had been current. It had been felt that theexistence of a farm owned and operated by pigs was somehow abnormal andwas liable to have an unsettling effect in the neighbourhood. Too manyfarmers had assumed, without due enquiry, that on such a farm a spirit oflicence and indiscipline would prevail. They had been nervous about theeffects upon their own animals, or even upon their human employees. Butall such doubts were now dispelled. Today he and his friends had visitedAnimal Farm and inspected every inch of it with their own eyes, and whatdid they find? Not only the most up-to-date methods, but a discipline andan orderliness which should be an example to all farmers everywhere. Hebelieved that he was right in saying that the lower animals on Animal Farmdid more work and received less food than any animals in the county.Indeed, he and his fellow-visitors today had observed many features whichthey intended to introduce on their own farms immediately.

He would end his remarks, he said, by emphasising once again the friendlyfeelings that subsisted, and ought to subsist, between Animal Farm and itsneighbours. Between pigs and human beings there was not, and there neednot be, any clash of interests whatever. Their struggles and theirdifficulties were one. Was not the labour problem the same everywhere?Here it became apparent that Mr. Pilkington was about to spring somecarefully prepared witticism on the company, but for a moment he was tooovercome by amusement to be able to utter it. After much choking, duringwhich his various chins turned purple, he managed to get it out: "If youhave your lower animals to contend with," he said, "we have our lowerclasses!" This BON MOT set the table in a roar; and Mr. Pilkington onceagain congratulated the pigs on the low rations, the long working hours,and the general absence of pampering which he had observed on Animal Farm.

And now, he said finally, he would ask the company to rise to their feetand make certain that their glasses were full. "Gentlemen," concludedMr. Pilkington, "gentlemen, I give you a toast: To the prosperity ofAnimal Farm!"

There was enthusiastic cheering and stamping of feet. Napoleon was sogratified that he left his place and came round the table to clink hismug against Mr. Pilkington's before emptying it. When the cheering haddied down, Napoleon, who had remained on his feet, intimated that he toohad a few words to say.

Like all of Napoleon's speeches, it was short and to the point. He too,he said, was happy that the period of misunderstanding was at an end. Fora long time there had been rumours--circulated, he had reason to think,by some malignant enemy--that there was something subversive and evenrevolutionary in the outlook of himself and his colleagues. They had beencredited with attempting to stir up rebellion among the animals onneighbouring farms. Nothing could be further from the truth! Their solewish, now and in the past, was to live at peace and in normal businessrelations with their neighbours. This farm which he had the honour tocontrol, he added, was a co-operative enterprise. The title-deeds, whichwere in his own possession, were owned by the pigs jointly.

He did not believe, he said, that any of the old suspicions stilllingered, but certain changes had been made recently in the routine of thefarm which should have the effect of promoting confidence still further.Hitherto the animals on the farm had had a rather foolish custom ofaddressing one another as "Comrade." This was to be suppressed. There hadalso been a very strange custom, whose origin was unknown, of marchingevery Sunday morning past a boar's skull which was nailed to a post in thegarden. This, too, would be suppressed, and the skull had already beenburied. His visitors might have observed, too, the green flag which flewfrom the masthead. If so, they would perhaps have noted that the whitehoof and horn with which it had previously been marked had now beenremoved. It would be a plain green flag from now onwards.

He had only one criticism, he said, to make of Mr. Pilkington's excellentand neighbourly speech. Mr. Pilkington had referred throughout to"Animal Farm." He could not of course know--for he, Napoleon, was onlynow for the first time announcing it--that the name "Animal Farm"had been abolished. Henceforward the farm was to be known as "The ManorFarm"--which, he believed, was its correct and original name.

"Gentlemen," concluded Napoleon, "I will give you the same toast asbefore, but in a different form. Fill your glasses to the brim. Gentlemen,here is my toast: To the prosperity of The Manor Farm!"

There was the same hearty cheering as before, and the mugs were emptied tothe dregs. But as the animals outside gazed at the scene, it seemed tothem that some strange thing was happening. What was it that had alteredin the faces of the pigs? Clover's old dim eyes flitted from one face toanother. Some of them had five chins, some had four, some had three. Butwhat was it that seemed to be melting and changing? Then, the applausehaving come to an end, the company took up their cards and continued thegame that had been interrupted, and the animals crept silently away.

But they had not gone twenty yards when they stopped short. An uproar ofvoices was coming from the farmhouse. They rushed back and looked throughthe window again. Yes, a violent quarrel was in progress. There wereshoutings, bangings on the table, sharp suspicious glances, furiousdenials. The source of the trouble appeared to be that Napoleon andMr. Pilkington had each played an ace of spades simultaneously.

Twelve voices were shouting in anger, and they were all alike. No question,now, what had happened to the faces of the pigs. The creatures outsidelooked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again;but already it was impossible to say which was which.




