It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen.Winston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape thevile wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions,though not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from enteringalong with him.

The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it acoloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall.It depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of aman of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsomefeatures. Winston made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Evenat the best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electriccurrent was cut off during daylight hours. It was part of the economy drivein preparation for Hate Week. The flat was seven flights up, and Winston,who was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, wentslowly, resting several times on the way. On each landing, opposite thelift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It wasone of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you aboutwhen you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran.

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which hadsomething to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from anoblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surfaceof the right-hand wall. Winston turned a switch and the voice sanksomewhat, though the words were still distinguishable. The instrument(the telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way ofshutting it off completely. He moved over to the window: a smallish, frailfigure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overallswhich were the uniform of the party. His hair was very fair, his facenaturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razorblades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down inthe street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper intospirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, thereseemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plasteredeverywhere. The black-moustachio'd face gazed down from every commandingcorner. There was one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHERIS WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep intoWinston's own. Down at street level another poster, torn at one corner,flapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering thesingle word INGSOC. In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down betweenthe roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away againwith a curving flight. It was the police patrol, snooping into people'swindows. The patrols did not matter, however. Only the Thought Policemattered.

Behind Winston's back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling awayabout pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. Thetelescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that Winstonmade, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it,moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metalplaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of courseno way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. Howoften, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individualwire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody allthe time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wantedto. You had to live--did live, from habit that became instinct--in theassumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except indarkness, every movement scrutinized.

Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer; though, as hewell knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometre away the Ministry ofTruth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape.This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste--this was London, chiefcity of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces ofOceania. He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell himwhether London had always been quite like this. Were there always thesevistas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up withbaulks of timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofswith corrugated iron, their crazy garden walls sagging in all directions?And the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and thewillow-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where thebombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid coloniesof wooden dwellings like chicken-houses? But it was no use, he could notremember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright-littableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible.

The Ministry of Truth--Minitrue, in Newspeak [Newspeak was the officiallanguage of Oceania. For an account of its structure and etymology seeAppendix.]--was startlingly different from any other object in sight. Itwas an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white concrete, soaringup, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the air. From where Winstonstood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face inelegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party:



  WAR IS PEACE  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH



The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms aboveground level, and corresponding ramifications below. Scattered about Londonthere were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size. Socompletely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roofof Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously. Theywere the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatusof government was divided. The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itselfwith news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts. The Ministry ofPeace, which concerned itself with war. The Ministry of Love, whichmaintained law and order. And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsiblefor economic affairs. Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluv,and Miniplenty.

The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windowsin it at all. Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, norwithin half a kilometre of it. It was a place impossible to enter excepton official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze ofbarbed-wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests. Eventhe streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-facedguards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons.

Winston turned round abruptly. He had set his features into theexpression of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facingthe telescreen. He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen. By leavingthe Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in thecanteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen excepta hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for tomorrow'sbreakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquidwith a plain white label marked VICTORY GIN. It gave off a sickly, oilysmell, as of Chinese rice-spirit. Winston poured out nearly a teacupful,nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medicine.

Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes. Thestuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had thesensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. Thenext moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the worldbegan to look more cheerful. He took a cigarette from a crumpled packetmarked VICTORY CIGARETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon thetobacco fell out on to the floor. With the next he was more successful.He went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stoodto the left of the telescreen. From the table drawer he took out apenholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank book with ared back and a marbled cover.

For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusualposition. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, whereit could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite thewindow. To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winstonwas now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably beenintended to hold bookshelves. By sitting in the alcove, and keeping wellback, Winston was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, sofar as sight went. He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayedin his present position he could not be seen. It was partly the unusualgeography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was nowabout to do.

But it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out ofthe drawer. It was a peculiarly beautiful book. Its smooth creamy paper,a little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured forat least forty years past. He could guess, however, that the book was mucholder than that. He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy littlejunk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did notnow remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelming desireto possess it. Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shops('dealing on the free market', it was called), but the rule was notstrictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces andrazor blades, which it was impossible to get hold of in any other way. Hehad given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped insideand bought the book for two dollars fifty. At the time he was not consciousof wanting it for any particular purpose. He had carried it guiltily homein his briefcase. Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromisingpossession.

The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary. This was not illegal(nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detectedit was reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at leastby twenty-five years in a forced-labour camp. Winston fitted a nib intothe penholder and sucked it to get the grease off. The pen was an archaicinstrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured one,furtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that thebeautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib insteadof being scratched with an ink-pencil. Actually he was not used to writingby hand. Apart from very short notes, it was usual to dictate everythinginto the speak-write which was of course impossible for his presentpurpose. He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just asecond. A tremor had gone through his bowels. To mark the paper was thedecisive act. In small clumsy letters he wrote:



   April 4th, 1984.



He sat back. A sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him. Tobegin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984. Itmust be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age wasthirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; butit was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two.

For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this diary?For the future, for the unborn. His mind hovered for a moment round thedoubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against theNewspeak word DOUBLETHINK. For the first time the magnitude of what he hadundertaken came home to him. How could you communicate with the future? Itwas of its nature impossible. Either the future would resemble the present,in which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from it,and his predicament would be meaningless.

For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper. The telescreen hadchanged over to strident military music. It was curious that he seemednot merely to have lost the power of expressing himself, but even to haveforgotten what it was that he had originally intended to say. For weekspast he had been making ready for this moment, and it had never crossedhis mind that anything would be needed except courage. The actual writingwould be easy. All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminablerestless monologue that had been running inside his head, literally foryears. At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up. Moreoverhis varicose ulcer had begun itching unbearably. He dared not scratch it,because if he did so it always became inflamed. The seconds were tickingby. He was conscious of nothing except the blankness of the page in frontof him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the music,and a slight booziness caused by the gin.

Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of whathe was setting down. His small but childish handwriting straggled up anddown the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even itsfull stops:



   April 4th, 1984. Last night to the flicks. All war films. One very goodone of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean.Audience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim awaywith a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along in thewater like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights,then he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank assuddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting withlaughter when he sank. then you saw a lifeboat full of children with ahelicopter hovering over it. there was a middle-aged woman might have beena jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old inher arms. little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between herbreasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman puttingher arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with frightherself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thoughther arms could keep the bullets off him. then the helicopter planted a 20kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwood.then there was a wonderful shot of a child's arm going up up up right upinto the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed itup and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down inthe prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shoutingthey didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it aintright not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned herout i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the prolessay typical prole reaction they never----



Winston stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp. He didnot know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the curiousthing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory hadclarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal towriting it down. It was, he now realized, because of this other incidentthat he had suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today.

It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous couldbe said to happen.

It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records Department, where Winstonworked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping themin the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation forthe Two Minutes Hate. Winston was just taking his place in one of themiddle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spokento, came unexpectedly into the room. One of them was a girl whom he oftenpassed in the corridors. He did not know her name, but he knew that sheworked in the Fiction Department. Presumably--since he had sometimes seenher with oily hands and carrying a spanner--she had some mechanical jobon one of the novel-writing machines. She was a bold-looking girl, ofabout twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athleticmovements. A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, waswound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough tobring out the shapeliness of her hips. Winston had disliked her from thevery first moment of seeing her. He knew the reason. It was because of theatmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and generalclean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her. He dislikednearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones. It was alwaysthe women, and above all the young ones, who were the most bigotedadherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies andnosers-out of unorthodoxy. But this particular girl gave him the impressionof being more dangerous than most. Once when they passed in the corridorshe gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right intohim and for a moment had filled him with black terror. The idea had evencrossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police. That,it was true, was very unlikely. Still, he continued to feel a peculiaruneasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenevershe was anywhere near him.

The other person was a man named O'Brien, a member of the Inner Party andholder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a dimidea of its nature. A momentary hush passed over the group of peopleround the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party memberapproaching. O'Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse,humorous, brutal face. In spite of his formidable appearance he had acertain charm of manner. He had a trick of resettling his spectacles onhis nose which was curiously disarming--in some indefinable way, curiouslycivilized. It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in suchterms, might have recalled an eighteenth-century nobleman offering hissnuffbox. Winston had seen O'Brien perhaps a dozen times in almost as manyyears. He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intriguedby the contrast between O'Brien's urbane manner and his prize-fighter'sphysique. Much more it was because of a secretly held belief--or perhapsnot even a belief, merely a hope--that O'Brien's political orthodoxy wasnot perfect. Something in his face suggested it irresistibly. And again,perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, butsimply intelligence. But at any rate he had the appearance of being aperson that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen andget him alone. Winston had never made the smallest effort to verify thisguess: indeed, there was no way of doing so. At this moment O'Brien glancedat his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidentlydecided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate wasover. He took a chair in the same row as Winston, a couple of places away.A small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to Winston wasbetween them. The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind.

The next moment a hideous, grinding speech, as of some monstrous machinerunning without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room.It was a noise that set one's teeth on edge and bristled the hair at theback of one's neck. The Hate had started.

As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, hadflashed on to the screen. There were hisses here and there among theaudience. The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear anddisgust. Goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago(how long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leadingfigures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, andthen had engaged in counter-revolutionary activities, had been condemnedto death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared. The programmesof the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was none inwhich Goldstein was not the principal figure. He was the primal traitor,the earliest defiler of the Party's purity. All subsequent crimes againstthe Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviations,sprang directly out of his teaching. Somewhere or other he was stillalive and hatching his conspiracies: perhaps somewhere beyond the sea,under the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even--so it wasoccasionally rumoured--in some hiding-place in Oceania itself.

Winston's diaphragm was constricted. He could never see the face ofGoldstein without a painful mixture of emotions. It was a lean Jewish face,with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard--aclever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senilesilliness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacleswas perched. It resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had asheep-like quality. Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attackupon the doctrines of the Party--an attack so exaggerated and perverse thata child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausibleenough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, lesslevel-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it. He was abusing BigBrother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demandingthe immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedomof speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, freedom of thought,he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed--and allthis in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of thehabitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeakwords: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normallyuse in real life. And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as tothe reality which Goldstein's specious claptrap covered, behind his head onthe telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army--rowafter row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swamup to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by othersexactly similar. The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers' boots formed thebackground to Goldstein's bleating voice.

Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrollableexclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room.The self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying powerof the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besides,the sight or even the thought of Goldstein produced fear and angerautomatically. He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasiaor Eastasia, since when Oceania was at war with one of these Powers it wasgenerally at peace with the other. But what was strange was that althoughGoldstein was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and athousand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapers,in books, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to thegeneral gaze for the pitiful rubbish that they were--in spite of all this,his influence never seemed to grow less. Always there were fresh dupeswaiting to be seduced by him. A day never passed when spies and saboteursacting under his directions were not unmasked by the Thought Police.He was the commander of a vast shadowy army, an underground network ofconspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the State. The Brotherhood, itsname was supposed to be. There were also whispered stories of a terriblebook, a compendium of all the heresies, of which Goldstein was the authorand which circulated clandestinely here and there. It was a book without atitle. People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK. But one knewof such things only through vague rumours. Neither the Brotherhood norTHE BOOK was a subject that any ordinary Party member would mention ifthere was a way of avoiding it.

In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy. People were leaping up anddown in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effortto drown the maddening bleating voice that came from the screen. The littlesandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening andshutting like that of a landed fish. Even O'Brien's heavy face was flushed.He was sitting very straight in his chair, his powerful chest swelling andquivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave. Thedark-haired girl behind Winston had begun crying out 'Swine! Swine! Swine!'and suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at thescreen. It struck Goldstein's nose and bounced off; the voice continuedinexorably. In a lucid moment Winston found that he was shouting with theothers and kicking his heel violently against the rung of his chair. Thehorrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged toact a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impossible to avoid joiningin. Within thirty seconds any pretence was always unnecessary. A hideousecstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire to kill, to torture, to smashfaces in with a sledge-hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group ofpeople like an electric current, turning one even against one's will intoa grimacing, screaming lunatic. And yet the rage that one felt was anabstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one object toanother like the flame of a blowlamp. Thus, at one moment Winston's hatredwas not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, againstBig Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such moments hisheart went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardianof truth and sanity in a world of lies. And yet the very next instant hewas at one with the people about him, and all that was said of Goldsteinseemed to him to be true. At those moments his secret loathing of BigBrother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed to tower up, aninvincible, fearless protector, standing like a rock against the hordesof Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, his helplessness, andthe doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like some sinisterenchanter, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the structureof civilization.

It was even possible, at moments, to switch one's hatred this way or thatby a voluntary act. Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which onewrenches one's head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeededin transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark-hairedgirl behind him. Vivid, beautiful hallucinations flashed through his mind.He would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon. He would tie her nakedto a stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian. He wouldravish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax. Better than before,moreover, he realized WHY it was that he hated her. He hated her becauseshe was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed withher and would never do so, because round her sweet supple waist, whichseemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there was only the odiousscarlet sash, aggressive symbol of chastity.

The Hate rose to its climax. The voice of Goldstein had become an actualsheep's bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep.Then the sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemedto be advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, andseeming to spring out of the surface of the screen, so that some of thepeople in the front row actually flinched backwards in their seats. Butin the same moment, drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, thehostile figure melted into the face of Big Brother, black-haired,black-moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast thatit almost filled up the screen. Nobody heard what Big Brother was saying.It was merely a few words of encouragement, the sort of words that areuttered in the din of battle, not distinguishable individually butrestoring confidence by the fact of being spoken. Then the face of BigBrother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stoodout in bold capitals:



  WAR IS PEACE  FREEDOM IS SLAVERY  IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH



But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for several seconds on thescreen, as though the impact that it had made on everyone's eyeballs wastoo vivid to wear off immediately. The little sandy-haired woman had flungherself forward over the back of the chair in front of her. With atremulous murmur that sounded like 'My Saviour!' she extended her armstowards the screen. Then she buried her face in her hands. It was apparentthat she was uttering a prayer.

At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow,rhythmical chant of 'B-B!...B-B!'--over and over again, very slowly, with along pause between the first 'B' and the second--a heavy, murmurous sound,somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear thestamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms. For perhaps as much asthirty seconds they kept it up. It was a refrain that was often heard inmoments of overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdomand majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis,a deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noise.Winston's entrails seemed to grow cold. In the Two Minutes Hate he couldnot help sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chanting of'B-B!...B-B!' always filled him with horror. Of course he chanted with therest: it was impossible to do otherwise. To dissemble your feelings, tocontrol your face, to do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctivereaction. But there was a space of a couple of seconds during which theexpression of his eyes might conceivably have betrayed him. And it wasexactly at this moment that the significant thing happened--if, indeed,it did happen.

Momentarily he caught O'Brien's eye. O'Brien had stood up. He had takenoff his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose withhis characteristic gesture. But there was a fraction of a second whentheir eyes met, and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew--yes, heKNEW!--that O'Brien was thinking the same thing as himself. An unmistakablemessage had passed. It was as though their two minds had opened and thethoughts were flowing from one into the other through their eyes. 'I amwith you,' O'Brien seemed to be saying to him. 'I know precisely what youare feeling. I know all about your contempt, your hatred, your disgust.But don't worry, I am on your side!' And then the flash of intelligencewas gone, and O'Brien's face was as inscrutable as everybody else's.

That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had happened. Suchincidents never had any sequel. All that they did was to keep alive in himthe belief, or hope, that others besides himself were the enemies of theParty. Perhaps the rumours of vast underground conspiracies were true afterall--perhaps the Brotherhood really existed! It was impossible, in spiteof the endless arrests and confessions and executions, to be sure that theBrotherhood was not simply a myth. Some days he believed in it, some daysnot. There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anythingor nothing: snatches of overheard conversation, faint scribbles on lavatorywalls--once, even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the handwhich had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition. It was allguesswork: very likely he had imagined everything. He had gone back to hiscubicle without looking at O'Brien again. The idea of following up theirmomentary contact hardly crossed his mind. It would have been inconceivablydangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it. For a second, twoseconds, they had exchanged an equivocal glance, and that was the end ofthe story. But even that was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness inwhich one had to live.

Winston roused himself and sat up straighter. He let out a belch. The ginwas rising from his stomach.

His eyes re-focused on the page. He discovered that while he sat helplesslymusing he had also been writing, as though by automatic action. And it wasno longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before. His pen had slidvoluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat capitals--



  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER  DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER



over and over again, filling half a page.

He could not help feeling a twinge of panic. It was absurd, since thewriting of those particular words was not more dangerous than the initialact of opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out thespoiled pages and abandon the enterprise altogether.

He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless. Whether hewrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER, or whether he refrained from writing it, madeno difference. Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not goon with it, made no difference. The Thought Police would get him just thesame. He had committed--would still have committed, even if he had neverset pen to paper--the essential crime that contained all others in itself.Thoughtcrime, they called it. Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could beconcealed for ever. You might dodge successfully for a while, even foryears, but sooner or later they were bound to get you.

It was always at night--the arrests invariably happened at night. Thesudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shaking your shoulder, the lightsglaring in your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed. In the vastmajority of cases there was no trial, no report of the arrest. Peoplesimply disappeared, always during the night. Your name was removed from theregisters, every record of everything you had ever done was wiped out, yourone-time existence was denied and then forgotten. You were abolished,annihilated: VAPORIZED was the usual word.

For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria. He began writing in ahurried untidy scrawl:



   theyll shoot me i don't care theyll shoot me in the back of the neck idont care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of theneck i dont care down with big brother----



He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid downthe pen. The next moment he started violently. There was a knocking atthe door.

Already! He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that whoever it wasmight go away after a single attempt. But no, the knocking was repeated.The worst thing of all would be to delay. His heart was thumping like adrum, but his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless. He gotup and moved heavily towards the door.
