Chapter I

Out to Sea


I had this story from one who had no business to tell it to me, or toany other.  I may credit the seductive influence of an old vintage uponthe narrator for the beginning of it, and my own skeptical incredulityduring the days that followed for the balance of the strange tale.

When my convivial host discovered that he had told me so much, and thatI was prone to doubtfulness, his foolish pride assumed the task the oldvintage had commenced, and so he unearthed written evidence in the formof musty manuscript, and dry official records of the British ColonialOffice to support many of the salient features of his remarkablenarrative.

I do not say the story is true, for I did not witness the happeningswhich it portrays, but the fact that in the telling of it to you I havetaken fictitious names for the principal characters quite sufficientlyevidences the sincerity of my own belief that it MAY be true.

The yellow, mildewed pages of the diary of a man long dead, and therecords of the Colonial Office dovetail perfectly with the narrative ofmy convivial host, and so I give you the story as I painstakinglypieced it out from these several various agencies.

If you do not find it credible you will at least be as one with me inacknowledging that it is unique, remarkable, and interesting.

From the records of the Colonial Office and from the dead man's diarywe learn that a certain young English nobleman, whom we shall call JohnClayton, Lord Greystoke, was commissioned to make a peculiarly delicateinvestigation of conditions in a British West Coast African Colony fromwhose simple native inhabitants another European power was known to berecruiting soldiers for its native army, which it used solely for theforcible collection of rubber and ivory from the savage tribes alongthe Congo and the Aruwimi.  The natives of the British Colonycomplained that many of their young men were enticed away through themedium of fair and glowing promises, but that few if any ever returnedto their families.

The Englishmen in Africa went even further, saying that these poorblacks were held in virtual slavery, since after their terms ofenlistment expired their ignorance was imposed upon by their whiteofficers, and they were told that they had yet several years to serve.

And so the Colonial Office appointed John Clayton to a new post inBritish West Africa, but his confidential instructions centered on athorough investigation of the unfair treatment of black Britishsubjects by the officers of a friendly European power.  Why he wassent, is, however, of little moment to this story, for he never made aninvestigation, nor, in fact, did he ever reach his destination.

Clayton was the type of Englishman that one likes best to associatewith the noblest monuments of historic achievement upon a thousandvictorious battlefields--a strong, virile man--mentally, morally, andphysically.

In stature he was above the average height; his eyes were gray, hisfeatures regular and strong; his carriage that of perfect, robusthealth influenced by his years of army training.

Political ambition had caused him to seek transference from the army tothe Colonial Office and so we find him, still young, entrusted with adelicate and important commission in the service of the Queen.

When he received this appointment he was both elated and appalled.  Thepreferment seemed to him in the nature of a well-merited reward forpainstaking and intelligent service, and as a stepping stone to postsof greater importance and responsibility; but, on the other hand, hehad been married to the Hon. Alice Rutherford for scarce a threemonths, and it was the thought of taking this fair young girl into thedangers and isolation of tropical Africa that appalled him.

For her sake he would have refused the appointment, but she would nothave it so.  Instead she insisted that he accept, and, indeed, take herwith him.

There were mothers and brothers and sisters, and aunts and cousins toexpress various opinions on the subject, but as to what they severallyadvised history is silent.

We know only that on a bright May morning in 1888, John, LordGreystoke, and Lady Alice sailed from Dover on their way to Africa.

A month later they arrived at Freetown where they chartered a smallsailing vessel, the Fuwalda, which was to bear them to their finaldestination.

And here John, Lord Greystoke, and Lady Alice, his wife, vanished fromthe eyes and from the knowledge of men.

Two months after they weighed anchor and cleared from the port ofFreetown a half dozen British war vessels were scouring the southAtlantic for trace of them or their little vessel, and it was almostimmediately that the wreckage was found upon the shores of St. Helenawhich convinced the world that the Fuwalda had gone down with all onboard, and hence the search was stopped ere it had scarce begun; thoughhope lingered in longing hearts for many years.

The Fuwalda, a barkentine of about one hundred tons, was a vessel ofthe type often seen in coastwise trade in the far southern Atlantic,their crews composed of the offscourings of the sea--unhanged murderersand cutthroats of every race and every nation.

The Fuwalda was no exception to the rule.  Her officers were swarthybullies, hating and hated by their crew.  The captain, while acompetent seaman, was a brute in his treatment of his men.  He knew, orat least he used, but two arguments in his dealings with them--abelaying pin and a revolver--nor is it likely that the motleyaggregation he signed would have understood aught else.

So it was that from the second day out from Freetown John Clayton andhis young wife witnessed scenes upon the deck of the Fuwalda such asthey had believed were never enacted outside the covers of printedstories of the sea.

It was on the morning of the second day that the first link was forgedin what was destined to form a chain of circumstances ending in a lifefor one then unborn such as has never been paralleled in the history ofman.

Two sailors were washing down the decks of the Fuwalda, the first matewas on duty, and the captain had stopped to speak with John Clayton andLady Alice.

The men were working backwards toward the little party who were facingaway from the sailors.  Closer and closer they came, until one of themwas directly behind the captain.  In another moment he would havepassed by and this strange narrative would never have been recorded.

But just that instant the officer turned to leave Lord and LadyGreystoke, and, as he did so, tripped against the sailor and sprawledheadlong upon the deck, overturning the water-pail so that he wasdrenched in its dirty contents.

For an instant the scene was ludicrous; but only for an instant.  Witha volley of awful oaths, his face suffused with the scarlet ofmortification and rage, the captain regained his feet, and with aterrific blow felled the sailor to the deck.

The man was small and rather old, so that the brutality of the act wasthus accentuated.  The other seaman, however, was neither old norsmall--a huge bear of a man, with fierce black mustachios, and a greatbull neck set between massive shoulders.

As he saw his mate go down he crouched, and, with a low snarl, sprangupon the captain crushing him to his knees with a single mighty blow.

From scarlet the officer's face went white, for this was mutiny; andmutiny he had met and subdued before in his brutal career.  Withoutwaiting to rise he whipped a revolver from his pocket, firing pointblank at the great mountain of muscle towering before him; but, quickas he was, John Clayton was almost as quick, so that the bullet whichwas intended for the sailor's heart lodged in the sailor's leg instead,for Lord Greystoke had struck down the captain's arm as he had seen theweapon flash in the sun.

Words passed between Clayton and the captain, the former making itplain that he was disgusted with the brutality displayed toward thecrew, nor would he countenance anything further of the kind while heand Lady Greystoke remained passengers.

The captain was on the point of making an angry reply, but, thinkingbetter of it, turned on his heel and black and scowling, strode aft.

He did not care to antagonize an English official, for the Queen'smighty arm wielded a punitive instrument which he could appreciate, andwhich he feared--England's far-reaching navy.

The two sailors picked themselves up, the older man assisting hiswounded comrade to rise.  The big fellow, who was known among his matesas Black Michael, tried his leg gingerly, and, finding that it bore hisweight, turned to Clayton with a word of gruff thanks.

Though the fellow's tone was surly, his words were evidently wellmeant.  Ere he had scarce finished his little speech he had turned andwas limping off toward the forecastle with the very apparent intentionof forestalling any further conversation.

They did not see him again for several days, nor did the captain accordthem more than the surliest of grunts when he was forced to speak tothem.

They took their meals in his cabin, as they had before the unfortunateoccurrence; but the captain was careful to see that his duties neverpermitted him to eat at the same time.

The other officers were coarse, illiterate fellows, but little abovethe villainous crew they bullied, and were only too glad to avoidsocial intercourse with the polished English noble and his lady, sothat the Claytons were left very much to themselves.

This in itself accorded perfectly with their desires, but it alsorather isolated them from the life of the little ship so that they wereunable to keep in touch with the daily happenings which were toculminate so soon in bloody tragedy.

There was in the whole atmosphere of the craft that undefinablesomething which presages disaster.  Outwardly, to the knowledge of theClaytons, all went on as before upon the little vessel; but that therewas an undertow leading them toward some unknown danger both felt,though they did not speak of it to each other.

On the second day after the wounding of Black Michael, Clayton came ondeck just in time to see the limp body of one of the crew being carriedbelow by four of his fellows while the first mate, a heavy belaying pinin his hand, stood glowering at the little party of sullen sailors.

Clayton asked no questions--he did not need to--and the following day,as the great lines of a British battleship grew out of the distanthorizon, he half determined to demand that he and Lady Alice be putaboard her, for his fears were steadily increasing that nothing butharm could result from remaining on the lowering, sullen Fuwalda.

Toward noon they were within speaking distance of the British vessel,but when Clayton had nearly decided to ask the captain to put themaboard her, the obvious ridiculousness of such a request becamesuddenly apparent.  What reason could he give the officer commandingher majesty's ship for desiring to go back in the direction from whichhe had just come!

What if he told them that two insubordinate seamen had been roughlyhandled by their officers?  They would but laugh in their sleeves andattribute his reason for wishing to leave the ship to but onething--cowardice.

John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, did not ask to be transferred to theBritish man-of-war.  Late in the afternoon he saw her upper works fadebelow the far horizon, but not before he learned that which confirmedhis greatest fears, and caused him to curse the false pride which hadrestrained him from seeking safety for his young wife a few short hoursbefore, when safety was within reach--a safety which was now goneforever.

It was mid-afternoon that brought the little old sailor, who had beenfelled by the captain a few days before, to where Clayton and his wifestood by the ship's side watching the ever diminishing outlines of thegreat battleship.  The old fellow was polishing brasses, and as he cameedging along until close to Clayton he said, in an undertone:

"'Ell's to pay, sir, on this 'ere craft, an' mark my word for it, sir.'Ell's to pay."

"What do you mean, my good fellow?" asked Clayton.

"Wy, hasn't ye seen wats goin' on?  Hasn't ye 'eard that devil's spawnof a capting an' is mates knockin' the bloomin' lights outen 'arf thecrew?

"Two busted 'eads yeste'day, an' three to-day.  Black Michael's as goodas new agin an' 'e's not the bully to stand fer it, not 'e; an' mark myword for it, sir."

"You mean, my man, that the crew contemplates mutiny?" asked Clayton.

"Mutiny!" exclaimed the old fellow.  "Mutiny!  They means murder, sir,an' mark my word for it, sir."

"When?"

"Hit's comin', sir; hit's comin' but I'm not a-sayin' wen, an' I'vesaid too damned much now, but ye was a good sort t'other day an' Ithought it no more'n right to warn ye.  But keep a still tongue in yer'ead an' when ye 'ear shootin' git below an' stay there.

"That's all, only keep a still tongue in yer 'ead, or they'll put apill between yer ribs, an' mark my word for it, sir," and the oldfellow went on with his polishing, which carried him away from wherethe Claytons were standing.

"Deuced cheerful outlook, Alice," said Clayton.

"You should warn the captain at once, John.  Possibly the trouble mayyet be averted," she said.

"I suppose I should, but yet from purely selfish motives I am almostprompted to 'keep a still tongue in my 'ead.' Whatever they do now theywill spare us in recognition of my stand for this fellow Black Michael,but should they find that I had betrayed them there would be no mercyshown us, Alice."

"You have but one duty, John, and that lies in the interest of vestedauthority.  If you do not warn the captain you are as much a party towhatever follows as though you had helped to plot and carry it out withyour own head and hands."

"You do not understand, dear," replied Clayton.  "It is of you I amthinking--there lies my first duty.  The captain has brought thiscondition upon himself, so why then should I risk subjecting my wife tounthinkable horrors in a probably futile attempt to save him from hisown brutal folly?  You have no conception, dear, of what would followwere this pack of cutthroats to gain control of the Fuwalda."

"Duty is duty, John, and no amount of sophistries may change it.  Iwould be a poor wife for an English lord were I to be responsible forhis shirking a plain duty.  I realize the danger which must follow, butI can face it with you."

"Have it as you will then, Alice," he answered, smiling.  "Maybe we areborrowing trouble.  While I do not like the looks of things on boardthis ship, they may not be so bad after all, for it is possible thatthe 'Ancient Mariner' was but voicing the desires of his wicked oldheart rather than speaking of real facts.

"Mutiny on the high sea may have been common a hundred years ago, butin this good year 1888 it is the least likely of happenings.

"But there goes the captain to his cabin now.  If I am going to warnhim I might as well get the beastly job over for I have little stomachto talk with the brute at all."

So saying he strolled carelessly in the direction of the companionwaythrough which the captain had passed, and a moment later was knockingat his door.

"Come in," growled the deep tones of that surly officer.

And when Clayton had entered, and closed the door behind him:

"Well?"

"I have come to report the gist of a conversation I heard to-day,because I feel that, while there may be nothing to it, it is as wellthat you be forearmed.  In short, the men contemplate mutiny andmurder."

"It's a lie!" roared the captain.  "And if you have been interferingagain with the discipline of this ship, or meddling in affairs thatdon't concern you you can take the consequences, and be damned.  Idon't care whether you are an English lord or not.  I'm captain of thishere ship, and from now on you keep your meddling nose out of mybusiness."

The captain had worked himself up to such a frenzy of rage that he wasfairly purple of face, and he shrieked the last words at the top of hisvoice, emphasizing his remarks by a loud thumping of the table with onehuge fist, and shaking the other in Clayton's face.

Greystoke never turned a hair, but stood eying the excited man withlevel gaze.

"Captain Billings," he drawled finally, "if you will pardon my candor,I might remark that you are something of an ass."

Whereupon he turned and left the captain with the same indifferent easethat was habitual with him, and which was more surely calculated toraise the ire of a man of Billings' class than a torrent of invective.

So, whereas the captain might easily have been brought to regret hishasty speech had Clayton attempted to conciliate him, his temper wasnow irrevocably set in the mold in which Clayton had left it, and thelast chance of their working together for their common good was gone.

"Well, Alice," said Clayton, as he rejoined his wife, "I might havesaved my breath.  The fellow proved most ungrateful.  Fairly jumped atme like a mad dog.

"He and his blasted old ship may hang, for aught I care; and until weare safely off the thing I shall spend my energies in looking after ourown welfare.  And I rather fancy the first step to that end should beto go to our cabin and look over my revolvers.  I am sorry now that wepacked the larger guns and the ammunition with the stuff below."

They found their quarters in a bad state of disorder.  Clothing fromtheir open boxes and bags strewed the little apartment, and even theirbeds had been torn to pieces.

"Evidently someone was more anxious about our belongings than we," saidClayton.  "Let's have a look around, Alice, and see what's missing."

A thorough search revealed the fact that nothing had been taken butClayton's two revolvers and the small supply of ammunition he had savedout for them.

"Those are the very things I most wish they had left us," said Clayton,"and the fact that they wished for them and them alone is mostsinister."

"What are we to do, John?" asked his wife.  "Perhaps you were right inthat our best chance lies in maintaining a neutral position.

"If the officers are able to prevent a mutiny, we have nothing to fear,while if the mutineers are victorious our one slim hope lies in nothaving attempted to thwart or antagonize them."

"Right you are, Alice.  We'll keep in the middle of the road."

As they started to straighten up their cabin, Clayton and his wifesimultaneously noticed the corner of a piece of paper protruding frombeneath the door of their quarters.  As Clayton stooped to reach for ithe was amazed to see it move further into the room, and then herealized that it was being pushed inward by someone from without.

Quickly and silently he stepped toward the door, but, as he reached forthe knob to throw it open, his wife's hand fell upon his wrist.

"No, John," she whispered.  "They do not wish to be seen, and so wecannot afford to see them.  Do not forget that we are keeping to themiddle of the road."

Clayton smiled and dropped his hand to his side.  Thus they stoodwatching the little bit of white paper until it finally remained atrest upon the floor just inside the door.

Then Clayton stooped and picked it up.  It was a bit of grimy, whitepaper roughly folded into a ragged square.  Opening it they found acrude message printed almost illegibly, and with many evidences of anunaccustomed task.

Translated, it was a warning to the Claytons to refrain from reportingthe loss of the revolvers, or from repeating what the old sailor hadtold them--to refrain on pain of death.

"I rather imagine we'll be good," said Clayton with a rueful smile."About all we can do is to sit tight and wait for whatever may come."





Chapter II

The Savage Home

Nor did they have long to wait, for the next morning as Clayton wasemerging on deck for his accustomed walk before breakfast, a shot rangout, and then another, and another.

The sight which met his eyes confirmed his worst fears.  Facing thelittle knot of officers was the entire motley crew of the Fuwalda, andat their head stood Black Michael.

At the first volley from the officers the men ran for shelter, and frompoints of vantage behind masts, wheel-house and cabin they returned thefire of the five men who represented the hated authority of the ship.

Two of their number had gone down before the captain's revolver.  Theylay where they had fallen between the combatants.  But then the firstmate lunged forward upon his face, and at a cry of command from BlackMichael the mutineers charged the remaining four.  The crew had beenable to muster but six firearms, so most of them were armed with boathooks, axes, hatchets and crowbars.

The captain had emptied his revolver and was reloading as the chargewas made.  The second mate's gun had jammed, and so there were but twoweapons opposed to the mutineers as they bore down upon the officers,who now started to give back before the infuriated rush of their men.

Both sides were cursing and swearing in a frightful manner, which,together with the reports of the firearms and the screams and groans ofthe wounded, turned the deck of the Fuwalda to the likeness of amadhouse.

Before the officers had taken a dozen backward steps the men were uponthem.  An ax in the hands of a burly Negro cleft the captain fromforehead to chin, and an instant later the others were down: dead orwounded from dozens of blows and bullet wounds.

Short and grisly had been the work of the mutineers of the Fuwalda, andthrough it all John Clayton had stood leaning carelessly beside thecompanionway puffing meditatively upon his pipe as though he had beenbut watching an indifferent cricket match.

As the last officer went down he thought it was time that he returnedto his wife lest some members of the crew find her alone below.

Though outwardly calm and indifferent, Clayton was inwardlyapprehensive and wrought up, for he feared for his wife's safety at thehands of these ignorant, half-brutes into whose hands fate had soremorselessly thrown them.

As he turned to descend the ladder he was surprised to see his wifestanding on the steps almost at his side.

"How long have you been here, Alice?"

"Since the beginning," she replied.  "How awful, John.  Oh, how awful!What can we hope for at the hands of such as those?"

"Breakfast, I hope," he answered, smiling bravely in an attempt toallay her fears.

"At least," he added, "I'm going to ask them.  Come with me, Alice.  Wemust not let them think we expect any but courteous treatment."

The men had by this time surrounded the dead and wounded officers, andwithout either partiality or compassion proceeded to throw both livingand dead over the sides of the vessel.  With equal heartlessness theydisposed of their own dead and dying.

Presently one of the crew spied the approaching Claytons, and with acry of:  "Here's two more for the fishes," rushed toward them withuplifted ax.

But Black Michael was even quicker, so that the fellow went down with abullet in his back before he had taken a half dozen steps.

With a loud roar, Black Michael attracted the attention of the others,and, pointing to Lord and Lady Greystoke, cried:

"These here are my friends, and they are to be left alone.  D'yeunderstand?

"I'm captain of this ship now, an' what I says goes," he added, turningto Clayton.  "Just keep to yourselves, and nobody'll harm ye," and helooked threateningly on his fellows.

The Claytons heeded Black Michael's instructions so well that they sawbut little of the crew and knew nothing of the plans the men weremaking.

Occasionally they heard faint echoes of brawls and quarreling among themutineers, and on two occasions the vicious bark of firearms rang outon the still air.  But Black Michael was a fit leader for this band ofcutthroats, and, withal held them in fair subjection to his rule.

On the fifth day following the murder of the ship's officers, land wassighted by the lookout.  Whether island or mainland, Black Michael didnot know, but he announced to Clayton that if investigation showed thatthe place was habitable he and Lady Greystoke were to be put ashorewith their belongings.

"You'll be all right there for a few months," he explained, "and bythat time we'll have been able to make an inhabited coast somewhere andscatter a bit.  Then I'll see that yer gover'ment's notified where yoube an' they'll soon send a man-o'war to fetch ye off.

"It would be a hard matter to land you in civilization without a lot o'questions being asked, an' none o' us here has any very convincin'answers up our sleeves."

Clayton remonstrated against the inhumanity of landing them upon anunknown shore to be left to the mercies of savage beasts, and,possibly, still more savage men.

But his words were of no avail, and only tended to anger Black Michael,so he was forced to desist and make the best he could of a badsituation.

About three o'clock in the afternoon they came about off a beautifulwooded shore opposite the mouth of what appeared to be a land-lockedharbor.

Black Michael sent a small boat filled with men to sound the entrancein an effort to determine if the Fuwalda could be safely worked throughthe entrance.

In about an hour they returned and reported deep water through thepassage as well as far into the little basin.

Before dark the barkentine lay peacefully at anchor upon the bosom ofthe still, mirror-like surface of the harbor.

The surrounding shores were beautiful with semitropical verdure, whilein the distance the country rose from the ocean in hill and tableland,almost uniformly clothed by primeval forest.

No signs of habitation were visible, but that the land might easilysupport human life was evidenced by the abundant bird and animal lifeof which the watchers on the Fuwalda's deck caught occasional glimpses,as well as by the shimmer of a little river which emptied into theharbor, insuring fresh water in plenitude.

As darkness settled upon the earth, Clayton and Lady Alice still stoodby the ship's rail in silent contemplation of their future abode.  Fromthe dark shadows of the mighty forest came the wild calls of savagebeasts--the deep roar of the lion, and, occasionally, the shrill screamof a panther.

The woman shrank closer to the man in terror-stricken anticipation ofthe horrors lying in wait for them in the awful blackness of the nightsto come, when they should be alone upon that wild and lonely shore.

Later in the evening Black Michael joined them long enough to instructthem to make their preparations for landing on the morrow.  They triedto persuade him to take them to some more hospitable coast near enoughto civilization so that they might hope to fall into friendly hands.But no pleas, or threats, or promises of reward could move him.

"I am the only man aboard who would not rather see ye both safely dead,and, while I know that's the sensible way to make sure of our ownnecks, yet Black Michael's not the man to forget a favor.  Ye saved mylife once, and in return I'm goin' to spare yours, but that's all I cando.

"The men won't stand for any more, and if we don't get ye landed prettyquick they may even change their minds about giving ye that much show.I'll put all yer stuff ashore with ye as well as cookin' utensils an'some old sails for tents, an' enough grub to last ye until ye can findfruit and game.

"With yer guns for protection, ye ought to be able to live here easyenough until help comes.  When I get safely hid away I'll see to itthat the British gover'ment learns about where ye be; for the life ofme I couldn't tell 'em exactly where, for I don't know myself.  Butthey'll find ye all right."

After he had left them they went silently below, each wrapped in gloomyforebodings.

Clayton did not believe that Black Michael had the slightest intentionof notifying the British government of their whereabouts, nor was heany too sure but that some treachery was contemplated for the followingday when they should be on shore with the sailors who would have toaccompany them with their belongings.

Once out of Black Michael's sight any of the men might strike themdown, and still leave Black Michael's conscience clear.

And even should they escape that fate was it not but to be faced withfar graver dangers?  Alone, he might hope to survive for years; for hewas a strong, athletic man.

But what of Alice, and that other little life so soon to be launchedamidst the hardships and grave dangers of a primeval world?

The man shuddered as he meditated upon the awful gravity, the fearfulhelplessness, of their situation.  But it was a merciful Providencewhich prevented him from foreseeing the hideous reality which awaitedthem in the grim depths of that gloomy wood.

Early next morning their numerous chests and boxes were hoisted on deckand lowered to waiting small boats for transportation to shore.

There was a great quantity and variety of stuff, as the Claytons hadexpected a possible five to eight years' residence in their new home.Thus, in addition to the many necessities they had brought, there werealso many luxuries.

Black Michael was determined that nothing belonging to the Claytonsshould be left on board.  Whether out of compassion for them, or infurtherance of his own self-interests, it would be difficult to say.

There was no question but that the presence of property of a missingBritish official upon a suspicious vessel would have been a difficultthing to explain in any civilized port in the world.

So zealous was he in his efforts to carry out his intentions that heinsisted upon the return of Clayton's revolvers to him by the sailorsin whose possession they were.

Into the small boats were also loaded salt meats and biscuit, with asmall supply of potatoes and beans, matches, and cooking vessels, achest of tools, and the old sails which Black Michael had promised them.

As though himself fearing the very thing which Clayton had suspected,Black Michael accompanied them to shore, and was the last to leave themwhen the small boats, having filled the ship's casks with fresh water,were pushed out toward the waiting Fuwalda.

As the boats moved slowly over the smooth waters of the bay, Claytonand his wife stood silently watching their departure--in the breasts ofboth a feeling of impending disaster and utter hopelessness.

And behind them, over the edge of a low ridge, other eyeswatched--close set, wicked eyes, gleaming beneath shaggy brows.

As the Fuwalda passed through the narrow entrance to the harbor and outof sight behind a projecting point, Lady Alice threw her arms aboutClayton's neck and burst into uncontrolled sobs.

Bravely had she faced the dangers of the mutiny; with heroic fortitudeshe had looked into the terrible future; but now that the horror ofabsolute solitude was upon them, her overwrought nerves gave way, andthe reaction came.

He did not attempt to check her tears.  It were better that nature haveher way in relieving these long-pent emotions, and it was many minutesbefore the girl--little more than a child she was--could again gainmastery of herself.

"Oh, John," she cried at last, "the horror of it.  What are we to do?What are we to do?"

"There is but one thing to do, Alice," and he spoke as quietly asthough they were sitting in their snug living room at home, "and thatis work.  Work must be our salvation.  We must not give ourselves timeto think, for in that direction lies madness.

"We must work and wait.  I am sure that relief will come, and comequickly, when once it is apparent that the Fuwalda has been lost, eventhough Black Michael does not keep his word to us."

"But John, if it were only you and I," she sobbed, "we could endure itI know; but--"

"Yes, dear," he answered, gently, "I have been thinking of that, also;but we must face it, as we must face whatever comes, bravely and withthe utmost confidence in our ability to cope with circumstanceswhatever they may be.

"Hundreds of thousands of years ago our ancestors of the dim anddistant past faced the same problems which we must face, possibly inthese same primeval forests.  That we are here today evidences theirvictory.

"What they did may we not do?  And even better, for are we not armedwith ages of superior knowledge, and have we not the means ofprotection, defense, and sustenance which science has given us, but ofwhich they were totally ignorant?  What they accomplished, Alice, withinstruments and weapons of stone and bone, surely that may weaccomplish also."

"Ah, John, I wish that I might be a man with a man's philosophy, but Iam but a woman, seeing with my heart rather than my head, and all thatI can see is too horrible, too unthinkable to put into words.

"I only hope you are right, John.  I will do my best to be a braveprimeval woman, a fit mate for the primeval man."

Clayton's first thought was to arrange a sleeping shelter for thenight; something which might serve to protect them from prowling beastsof prey.

He opened the box containing his rifles and ammunition, that they mightboth be armed against possible attack while at work, and then togetherthey sought a location for their first night's sleeping place.

A hundred yards from the beach was a little level spot, fairly free oftrees; here they decided eventually to build a permanent house, but forthe time being they both thought it best to construct a little platformin the trees out of reach of the larger of the savage beasts in whoserealm they were.

To this end Clayton selected four trees which formed a rectangle abouteight feet square, and cutting long branches from other trees heconstructed a framework around them, about ten feet from the ground,fastening the ends of the branches securely to the trees by means ofrope, a quantity of which Black Michael had furnished him from the holdof the Fuwalda.

Across this framework Clayton placed other smaller branches quite closetogether.  This platform he paved with the huge fronds of elephant'sear which grew in profusion about them, and over the fronds he laid agreat sail folded into several thicknesses.

Seven feet higher he constructed a similar, though lighter platform toserve as roof, and from the sides of this he suspended the balance ofhis sailcloth for walls.

When completed he had a rather snug little nest, to which he carriedtheir blankets and some of the lighter luggage.

It was now late in the afternoon, and the balance of the daylight hourswere devoted to the building of a rude ladder by means of which LadyAlice could mount to her new home.

All during the day the forest about them had been filled with excitedbirds of brilliant plumage, and dancing, chattering monkeys, whowatched these new arrivals and their wonderful nest building operationswith every mark of keenest interest and fascination.

Notwithstanding that both Clayton and his wife kept a sharp lookoutthey saw nothing of larger animals, though on two occasions they hadseen their little simian neighbors come screaming and chattering fromthe near-by ridge, casting frightened glances back over their littleshoulders, and evincing as plainly as though by speech that they werefleeing some terrible thing which lay concealed there.

Just before dusk Clayton finished his ladder, and, filling a greatbasin with water from the near-by stream, the two mounted to thecomparative safety of their aerial chamber.

As it was quite warm, Clayton had left the side curtains thrown backover the roof, and as they sat, like Turks, upon their blankets, LadyAlice, straining her eyes into the darkening shadows of the wood,suddenly reached out and grasped Clayton's arms.

"John," she whispered, "look!  What is it, a man?"

As Clayton turned his eyes in the direction she indicated, he sawsilhouetted dimly against the shadows beyond, a great figure standingupright upon the ridge.

For a moment it stood as though listening and then turned slowly, andmelted into the shadows of the jungle.

"What is it, John?"

"I do not know, Alice," he answered gravely, "it is too dark to see sofar, and it may have been but a shadow cast by the rising moon."

"No, John, if it was not a man it was some huge and grotesque mockeryof man.  Oh, I am afraid."

He gathered her in his arms, whispering words of courage and love intoher ears.

Soon after, he lowered the curtain walls, tying them securely to thetrees so that, except for a little opening toward the beach, they wereentirely enclosed.

As it was now pitch dark within their tiny aerie they lay down upontheir blankets to try to gain, through sleep, a brief respite offorgetfulness.

Clayton lay facing the opening at the front, a rifle and a brace ofrevolvers at his hand.

Scarcely had they closed their eyes than the terrifying cry of apanther rang out from the jungle behind them.  Closer and closer itcame until they could hear the great beast directly beneath them.  Foran hour or more they heard it sniffing and clawing at the trees whichsupported their platform, but at last it roamed away across the beach,where Clayton could see it clearly in the brilliant moonlight--a great,handsome beast, the largest he had ever seen.

During the long hours of darkness they caught but fitful snatches ofsleep, for the night noises of a great jungle teeming with myriadanimal life kept their overwrought nerves on edge, so that a hundredtimes they were startled to wakefulness by piercing screams, or thestealthy moving of great bodies beneath them.





Chapter III

Life and Death

Morning found them but little, if at all refreshed, though it was witha feeling of intense relief that they saw the day dawn.

As soon as they had made their meager breakfast of salt pork, coffeeand biscuit, Clayton commenced work upon their house, for he realizedthat they could hope for no safety and no peace of mind at night untilfour strong walls effectually barred the jungle life from them.

The task was an arduous one and required the better part of a month,though he built but one small room.  He constructed his cabin of smalllogs about six inches in diameter, stopping the chinks with clay whichhe found at the depth of a few feet beneath the surface soil.

At one end he built a fireplace of small stones from the beach.  Thesealso he set in clay and when the house had been entirely completed heapplied a coating of the clay to the entire outside surface to thethickness of four inches.

In the window opening he set small branches about an inch in diameterboth vertically and horizontally, and so woven that they formed asubstantial grating that could withstand the strength of a powerfulanimal.  Thus they obtained air and proper ventilation without fear oflessening the safety of their cabin.

The A-shaped roof was thatched with small branches laid close togetherand over these long jungle grass and palm fronds, with a final coatingof clay.

The door he built of pieces of the packing-boxes which had held theirbelongings, nailing one piece upon another, the grain of contiguouslayers running transversely, until he had a solid body some threeinches thick and of such great strength that they were both moved tolaughter as they gazed upon it.

Here the greatest difficulty confronted Clayton, for he had no meanswhereby to hang his massive door now that he had built it.  After twodays' work, however, he succeeded in fashioning two massive hardwoodhinges, and with these he hung the door so that it opened and closedeasily.

The stuccoing and other final touches were added after they moved intothe house, which they had done as soon as the roof was on, piling theirboxes before the door at night and thus having a comparatively safe andcomfortable habitation.

The building of a bed, chairs, table, and shelves was a relatively easymatter, so that by the end of the second month they were well settled,and, but for the constant dread of attack by wild beasts and the evergrowing loneliness, they were not uncomfortable or unhappy.

At night great beasts snarled and roared about their tiny cabin, but,so accustomed may one become to oft repeated noises, that soon theypaid little attention to them, sleeping soundly the whole night through.

Thrice had they caught fleeting glimpses of great man-like figures likethat of the first night, but never at sufficiently close range to knowpositively whether the half-seen forms were those of man or brute.

The brilliant birds and the little monkeys had become accustomed totheir new acquaintances, and as they had evidently never seen humanbeings before they presently, after their first fright had worn off,approached closer and closer, impelled by that strange curiosity whichdominates the wild creatures of the forest and the jungle and theplain, so that within the first month several of the birds had gone sofar as even to accept morsels of food from the friendly hands of theClaytons.

One afternoon, while Clayton was working upon an addition to theircabin, for he contemplated building several more rooms, a number oftheir grotesque little friends came shrieking and scolding through thetrees from the direction of the ridge.  Ever as they fled they castfearful glances back of them, and finally they stopped near Claytonjabbering excitedly to him as though to warn him of approaching danger.

At last he saw it, the thing the little monkeys so feared--theman-brute of which the Claytons had caught occasional fleeting glimpses.

It was approaching through the jungle in a semi-erect position, now andthen placing the backs of its closed fists upon the ground--a greatanthropoid ape, and, as it advanced, it emitted deep guttural growlsand an occasional low barking sound.

Clayton was at some distance from the cabin, having come to fell aparticularly perfect tree for his building operations.  Grown carelessfrom months of continued safety, during which time he had seen nodangerous animals during the daylight hours, he had left his rifles andrevolvers all within the little cabin, and now that he saw the greatape crashing through the underbrush directly toward him, and from adirection which practically cut him off from escape, he felt a vaguelittle shiver play up and down his spine.

He knew that, armed only with an ax, his chances with this ferociousmonster were small indeed--and Alice; O God, he thought, what willbecome of Alice?

There was yet a slight chance of reaching the cabin.  He turned and rantoward it, shouting an alarm to his wife to run in and close the greatdoor in case the ape cut off his retreat.

Lady Greystoke had been sitting a little way from the cabin, and whenshe heard his cry she looked up to see the ape springing with almostincredible swiftness, for so large and awkward an animal, in an effortto head off Clayton.

With a low cry she sprang toward the cabin, and, as she entered, gave abackward glance which filled her soul with terror, for the brute hadintercepted her husband, who now stood at bay grasping his ax with bothhands ready to swing it upon the infuriated animal when he should makehis final charge.

"Close and bolt the door, Alice," cried Clayton.  "I can finish thisfellow with my ax."

But he knew he was facing a horrible death, and so did she.

The ape was a great bull, weighing probably three hundred pounds.  Hisnasty, close-set eyes gleamed hatred from beneath his shaggy brows,while his great canine fangs were bared in a horrid snarl as he pauseda moment before his prey.

Over the brute's shoulder Clayton could see the doorway of his cabin,not twenty paces distant, and a great wave of horror and fear sweptover him as he saw his young wife emerge, armed with one of his rifles.

She had always been afraid of firearms, and would never touch them, butnow she rushed toward the ape with the fearlessness of a lionessprotecting its young.

"Back, Alice," shouted Clayton, "for God's sake, go back."

But she would not heed, and just then the ape charged, so that Claytoncould say no more.

The man swung his ax with all his mighty strength, but the powerfulbrute seized it in those terrible hands, and tearing it from Clayton'sgrasp hurled it far to one side.

With an ugly snarl he closed upon his defenseless victim, but ere hisfangs had reached the throat they thirsted for, there was a sharpreport and a bullet entered the ape's back between his shoulders.

Throwing Clayton to the ground the beast turned upon his new enemy.There before him stood the terrified girl vainly trying to fire anotherbullet into the animal's body; but she did not understand the mechanismof the firearm, and the hammer fell futilely upon an empty cartridge.

Almost simultaneously Clayton regained his feet, and without thought ofthe utter hopelessness of it, he rushed forward to drag the ape fromhis wife's prostrate form.

With little or no effort he succeeded, and the great bulk rolledinertly upon the turf before him--the ape was dead.  The bullet haddone its work.

A hasty examination of his wife revealed no marks upon her, and Claytondecided that the huge brute had died the instant he had sprung towardAlice.

Gently he lifted his wife's still unconscious form, and bore her to thelittle cabin, but it was fully two hours before she regainedconsciousness.

Her first words filled Clayton with vague apprehension.  For some timeafter regaining her senses, Alice gazed wonderingly about the interiorof the little cabin, and then, with a satisfied sigh, said:

"O, John, it is so good to be really home!  I have had an awful dream,dear.  I thought we were no longer in London, but in some horribleplace where great beasts attacked us."

"There, there, Alice," he said, stroking her forehead, "try to sleepagain, and do not worry your head about bad dreams."

That night a little son was born in the tiny cabin beside the primevalforest, while a leopard screamed before the door, and the deep notes ofa lion's roar sounded from beyond the ridge.

Lady Greystoke never recovered from the shock of the great ape'sattack, and, though she lived for a year after her baby was born, shewas never again outside the cabin, nor did she ever fully realize thatshe was not in England.

Sometimes she would question Clayton as to the strange noises of thenights; the absence of servants and friends, and the strange rudenessof the furnishings within her room, but, though he made no effort todeceive her, never could she grasp the meaning of it all.

In other ways she was quite rational, and the joy and happiness shetook in the possession of her little son and the constant attentions ofher husband made that year a very happy one for her, the happiest ofher young life.

That it would have been beset by worries and apprehension had she beenin full command of her mental faculties Clayton well knew; so thatwhile he suffered terribly to see her so, there were times when he wasalmost glad, for her sake, that she could not understand.

Long since had he given up any hope of rescue, except through accident.With unremitting zeal he had worked to beautify the interior of thecabin.

Skins of lion and panther covered the floor.  Cupboards and bookcaseslined the walls.  Odd vases made by his own hand from the clay of theregion held beautiful tropical flowers.  Curtains of grass and bamboocovered the windows, and, most arduous task of all, with his meagerassortment of tools he had fashioned lumber to neatly seal the wallsand ceiling and lay a smooth floor within the cabin.

That he had been able to turn his hands at all to such unaccustomedlabor was a source of mild wonder to him.  But he loved the workbecause it was for her and the tiny life that had come to cheer them,though adding a hundredfold to his responsibilities and to theterribleness of their situation.

During the year that followed, Clayton was several times attacked bythe great apes which now seemed to continually infest the vicinity ofthe cabin; but as he never again ventured outside without both rifleand revolvers he had little fear of the huge beasts.

He had strengthened the window protections and fitted a unique woodenlock to the cabin door, so that when he hunted for game and fruits, asit was constantly necessary for him to do to insure sustenance, he hadno fear that any animal could break into the little home.

At first he shot much of the game from the cabin windows, but towardthe end the animals learned to fear the strange lair from whence issuedthe terrifying thunder of his rifle.

In his leisure Clayton read, often aloud to his wife, from the store ofbooks he had brought for their new home.  Among these were many forlittle children--picture books, primers, readers--for they had knownthat their little child would be old enough for such before they mighthope to return to England.

At other times Clayton wrote in his diary, which he had always beenaccustomed to keep in French, and in which he recorded the details oftheir strange life.  This book he kept locked in a little metal box.

A year from the day her little son was born Lady Alice passed quietlyaway in the night.  So peaceful was her end that it was hours beforeClayton could awake to a realization that his wife was dead.

The horror of the situation came to him very slowly, and it is doubtfulthat he ever fully realized the enormity of his sorrow and the fearfulresponsibility that had devolved upon him with the care of that weething, his son, still a nursing babe.

The last entry in his diary was made the morning following her death,and there he recites the sad details in a matter-of-fact way that addsto the pathos of it; for it breathes a tired apathy born of long sorrowand hopelessness, which even this cruel blow could scarcely awake tofurther suffering:



My little son is crying for nourishment--O Alice, Alice, what shall Ido?



And as John Clayton wrote the last words his hand was destined ever topen, he dropped his head wearily upon his outstretched arms where theyrested upon the table he had built for her who lay still and cold inthe bed beside him.

For a long time no sound broke the deathlike stillness of the junglemidday save the piteous wailing of the tiny man-child.
